                           Naval Surface Warfare Center
                           Carderock Division

Naval Surface Warfare Center

CARDEROCK DIVISION West Bethesda, Maryland 20817-5700

                    Handbook
                        of

    Reliability Prediction Procedures
                       for

          Mechanical Equipment

              Logistics Technology Support

                       CARDEROCKDIV, NSWC-11
                                    May 2011

               Approved for Public Release; Distribution is Unlimited
            PREFACE

     Recognition of reliability and maintainability (R&M) as vital factors in the
development, production, operation, and maintenance of today's complex systems has
placed greater emphasis on the application of design evaluation techniques to logistics
management. An analysis of a design for reliability and maintainability can identify
critical failure modes and causes of unreliability and provide an effective tool for
predicting equipment behavior and selecting appropriate logistics measures to assure
satisfactory performance. Application of design evaluation techniques can provide a
sound basis for determining spare parts requirements, required part improvement
programs, needed redesign efforts, reallocation of resources and other logistics
measures to assure that specified reliability and maintainability requirements will be
met.

     Many efforts have been applied toward duplicating the data bank approach or
developing a new approach for mechanical equipment. The statistical analysis of
equipment aging characteristics, regression techniques of equipment operating
parameters related to failure rates, and analysis of field failure data have been studied
in attempts to develop a methodology that can be used to evaluate a new mechanical
design for R&M characteristics.

     Many of the attempts to develop R&M prediction methodology have been at a
system or subsystem level. The large number of variables at these levels and lack of
detailed knowledge regarding operating environment have created a problem in
applying the results to the design being evaluated. Attempts to collect failure rate data
or develop an R&M prediction methodology at the system or subsystem level produce a
wide dispersion of failure rates for apparently similar components because of the basic
characteristics of mechanical components.

     The Design Evaluation Techniques program was initiated by the Naval Surface
Warfare Center Carderock Division (NSWCCD) and was sponsored by the Office of
Naval Technology under the Logistics Exploratory Development Program, P.E. 62233N.
The methodology for predicting R&M characteristics as part of this development effort
does not rely solely on failure rate data. Instead, the design evaluation procedures
consider the material properties, operating environment and critical failure modes at the
component part level to evaluate a design for R&M. The purpose of this Handbook is to
present the methodology for predicting the reliability of mechanical equipment and
solicit comments as to the potential utility of a standard reference for reliability
predictions of mechanical equipment.

     The development of this Handbook by NSWCCD was coordinated with the military,
industry and academia. Sponsors of this effort included the U. S. Army Armament
Research, Development & Engineering Center (SMCAR-QAH-P), Picatinny Arsenal and

Preface  i  Revision A
the Robins AFB, WR-ALC/LVRS. These sponsors have provided valuable technical
guidance in the development of the methodology and Handbook. Chapter 1 of the
Handbook provides a summary of the testing program to validate the prediction
methodology. Also, the Robins AFB supplied an MC-2A Air Compressor Unit for
validation testing purposes. The procedures contained in this Handbook were used to
predict the failure modes of the MC-2A and their frequency of occurrence. Reliability
tests were then performed with a close correlation between predicted and actual
reliability being achieved. Past sponsors and participants in the program include the
Belvoir Research, Development, & Engineering Center; Wright-Patterson AFB; Naval
Sea Systems Command; Naval Air Test Center and Louisiana Tech University.

     Previous editions of this Handbook were distributed to interested engineering
personnel in industry and DoD for comments as to the utility of the methodology in
evaluating mechanical designs for reliability. The comments have been extremely
useful in improving the prediction methodology and contents of the Handbook. The
revised Handbook is available at no charge and can be downloaded by visiting the
NSWCCD website. Every effort has been made to validate the equations presented in
this Handbook. However, limited funding has prevented the extensive testing and
application of prediction procedures to the design/procurement process for full validation
of the approach. Therefore, users are cautioned that this Handbook is the result of a
research program and not an official DoD document.

     Several companies have chosen to produce software packages containing the
material in this Handbook, the attempt being to sell a software package whereby the
reliability of mechanical components can be predicted in the same way as electronic
components. The Navy has not been and is not now in any way connected with the
commercial ventures to produce software packages. As described previously, it is
important to understand the difference between the failure rate data used to evaluate
electronic equipment and the procedures used to evaluate mechanical equipment. For
a company to extract equations from the Handbook without regard to the application
procedures is in violation of the intent of the Handbook, the result being a potentially
dangerous situation for the user in logistically relying on inaccurate results. Another
result is the damaging reputation to NSWCCD and the Navy in their attempts to improve
the reliability of mechanical equipment through a greater understanding of mechanical
system design. To extract equations from the Handbook without regard to the
procedures and parameter limits defeats the purpose of the Handbook in helping the
designer of mechanical systems gain a greater insight as to the reliability of his design.

     NSWCCD has developed a software package that automates the use of procedures
and equations in the Handbook that can be used to evaluate the methodology. This
software program called MechRel can be downloaded free of charge by visiting the
NSWCCD website. In summary, the Handbook and associated software package
representing many years of research and development are already available at no
charge. Commercial exploitation of this work by extracting material without the full
content of the evaluation procedures violates the purpose of the work being done by

Preface  ii  Revision A
CDNSWC. Any product sold using material from the Handbook or referencing the
Handbook must contain a statement that CDNSWC and the Navy have not participated
in the development of or approve of their product.

     Interested users of the technology presented in this Handbook are urged to contact
CDNSWC to obtain the latest available information on mechanical reliability. Comments
and recommended changes to the Handbook should be addressed to:

Tyrone L. Jones
MechRel Program Manager
Code 2120
Naval Surface Warfare Center
9500 MacArthur Blvd
West Bethesda, MD 20817-5700
Telephone: 301-227-4383
E-mail: Tyrone.L.Jones@navy.mil

Preface  iii  Revision A
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Preface  iv                                  Revision A
                                                   CONTENTS

RELIABILITY PREDICTION PROCEDURES FOR MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
CARDEROCKDIV, NSWC-11

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 3 SEALS AND GASKETS
CHAPTER 4 SPRINGS
CHAPTER 5 SOLENOIDS, CONTACTORS
CHAPTER 6 VALVE ASSEMBLIES
CHAPTER 7 BEARINGS
CHAPTER 8 GEARS AND SPLINES
CHAPTER 9 ACTUATORS
CHAPTER 10 PUMPS
CHAPTER 11 FLUID FILTERS
CHAPTER 12 BRAKES AND CLUTCHES
CHAPTER 13 COMPRESSORS
CHAPTER 14 ELECTRIC MOTORS
CHAPTER 15 ACCUMULATORS, RESERVOIRS
CHAPTER 16 THREADED FASTENERS
CHAPTER 17 MECHANICAL COUPLINGS
CHAPTER 18 SLIDER CRANK MECHANISMS
CHAPTER 19 SENSORS AND TRANSDUCERS
CHAPTER 20 SHAFTS
CHAPTER 21 BELT AND CHAIN DRIVES
CHAPTER 22 FLUID CONDUCTORS
CHAPTER 23 MISCELLANEOUS PARTS
CHAPTER 24 DESIGN ANALYSIS OF EQUIPMENT AVAILABILITY
CHAPTER 25 REFERENCES

                     INDEX

CONTENTS  v
          This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CONTENTS  vi
Handbook of Reliability Prediction Procedures for Mechanical Equipment
                                      Change Record

Chapter Revision Page        Date                      Change

Preface        A  ii,iii     02/05/06  Corrected Handbook downloading address, e-
   1                                   mail address and added additional disclaimers
   1
   2           A  7-11       10/07/05  Revised Table 1-1 and supporting data to
   3                                   reflect revisions to referenced chapters
   3
   3                                   Revised Figure 1.2 and Table 1-1 to reflect
   3
   3           B  1-6 to 1-  12/13/09  changes in Chapters 3 and 6, added
                     12                illustration for example procedures and
   3
                                       corrected definition for spring load
   3
               A  All        02/21/11  Added definitions reflecting chapter additions
                                       and revisions

               A  3-24       01/12/05 Corrected equation for hardness factor

                                       Added procedures for pneumatic applications,

               B  3-6        11/07/05 updated viscosity tables and references and

                                       corrected equation for conductance parameter

               C  all        12/28/05  Corrected equations for gaskets added
                                       multiplying factor for gasket dimensions

               D  3-6        07/13/06 Corrected error in equation 3-4

                                       Deleted Seal Pressure Table and clarified

                                       CsubH parameter derivation. Corrected

               E  3-22       05/20/08 parameter identifiers for equation (3-15),

                                       added Figure 3.16 for surface finish of

                                       dynamic seals.

                                       Expanded failure modes for dynamic seals,

               F  all        09/05/09 corrected equation 3-14 and base failure rate,

                                       and added FMECA section

                                       Added procedures for evaluating mechanical

               G  all        02/01/11  seals. Separated procedures for dynamic seals
                                       depending on velocity of movement. Updated

                                       illustrations.

Change Record                          vii
Chapter Revision Page   Date            Change

4              A  4-32  01/05/05  Corrected multiplying factor for spring cycle
                                  rate

4              B  4-7   11/07/05  Inserted missing constants in Equation 4-5
                                  and corrected exponent error on various
                                  failure rate equations

4              C  all   09/15/07  Updated various tables for properties of
                                  spring materials

4              D  4-29  06/02/08  Corrected multiplying factors for beam and
                                  cantilever springs and equation 4-15 for wave
                  4-34            washers

4              E  all   02/01/11  Added information regarding the cyclic
                                  modes of spring operation and spring life.
                                  Corrected titles of various Figures.

5              B  5-4   01/12/05  Modified definition of coil surface area.
                                  Corrected references to Figures

5              C  all   05/01/08  Corrected equation 5-1 Separated procedures
                                  for evaluating solenoids and contactors

5              D  all   10/05/08  Revised base failure rates and prediction
                                  procedures per recent research, Changed
                                  solenoid base failure rate from hours to
                                  operations

5              E  all   02/01/11  Revised failure rate equation for solenoid
                                  assembly and multiplying factor for coil
                                  temperature

6              A  6-11  01/12/05 Corrected equation 6-11 and Figure 6.3

6              B  6-6   11/07/05  Added procedures for gas valves, updated
                                  viscosity tables and references .Corrected
                                  typo in Equation 6-4

6              C  6-12  06/01/08  Simplified and corrected poppet seat stress
                                  equations and corrected Fig 6-10, seat Stress
                                  Multiplying Factor. Corrected reference to
                                  Figure 6.10

Change Record                     viii
Chapter Revision Page       Date                           Change

                                      Added gas valve failure modes, expanded

6              D  6-3       08/30/09  failure modes section, added FMECA
                                      guidelines and changed seat stress parameter

                                      to contact pressure

6              E  6-8       11/10/10  Revised procedure for determining valve seat
                                      contact pressure

7              A  all       03/01/04  Revised procedures for determining dynamic
                                      loading of bearings

7              B  all       09/15/07  Revised procedures for evaluating equivalent
                                      radial load

7              C  all       10/10/08 Modified procedures for L10 determination

                                      Revised equation and procedure for

7              D  7-6, 7-12 01/15/11 determining bearing failure rate, applied load

                                      and service factor

                                      Corrected spline load factor equation. Added

                                      section on failure modes and explanation for

8              A  8-10      07/05/09  use of Brinell hardness number. Changed title
                  8-14                of section to Gear Loading M.F., modified
                                      equations 8-11 and 8-13. Corrected references

                                      to Section numbers and added explanation to

                                      equation 8-13

                                      Added explanation of Phase 2 wear, corrected

9              A  9-3, 9-4  09/10/07  equation 9-5 for axial loads, corrected
                                      equation 9-24 for temperature factor. Added

                                      table of failure modes

                                      Added explanatory notes on side and axial

9              B  9-6       08/15/08 loading, eliminated need for phase two

                                      calculations

                                      Expanded failure mode list, modified

9              C  all       03/01/11 temperature and contaminant modifying

                                      factors

10             A  10-9      01/24/05 Added labels to Figure 10-4

Change Record                         ix
                                     Included sections for displacement and

10             B  All      09/20/05 centrifugal pumps and revised equations.

                                     Revised contaminant multiplying factor,

                                     Expanded description of pump types, added

                                     sections on pump seals and bearings,

10             C  All      12/02/10 modified equation to project failure rate of

                                     fluid driver with percent flow and service

                                     factor.

                                     Corrected equation 11-5 and added

                                     explanatory notes on filter life. Modified

11             A  11-8 to  07/15/08  Table 11-2 adding values for x for equation
                  11-11              11-10Revised equations 11-1, 11-7 and 11-8.

                                     Replaced equation 11-9 with reference

                                     material.

                                     Expanded failure modes regarding filter

                                     performance, Updated equation for filter

11             B  all      02/08/11 failure rate to include cyclic flow and

                                     corrected equation for pressure multiplying

                                     factor.

12             A  12-19 06/20/06 Corrected typo in Equation 12-16

                                     Corrected nomenclatures for Equation 12-12

12             B  all      12/20/06 and typos following Equation 12-20. Added

                                     references

12             C  all      03/01/11  Revised general procedures foe determining
                                     failure rates of brake and clutch assemblies

                                     Included procedures for various types of

13             A  all      09/20/05 compressors, revised table of multiplying

                                     factors

                                     Expanded list of failure modes to include

13             B  all      03/01/11  various types of compressors, modified
                                     failure rate equation to include service

                                     multiplying factor, updated reference list.

14             A  14-6     09/15/07  Revised procedures for different classes of
                                     motors

Change Record                        x
Chapter Revision Page    Date                           Change

                                   Expanded failure mode table, Corrected

                                   motor failure rate equation to add base failure

14             B  all    11/12/10  rate and motor load service factor. Corrected
                                   method of determining winding temperature

                                   rise and voltage unbalance. Corrected voltage

                                   and altitude correction factors.

                  15-3             Added figure to identify accumulator types.

15             A  15-6   08/30/07 Corrected several equation subscripts and

                  15-12            added explanation of failure distribution

15             B  15-2, 7 07/22/10 Updated illustrations

16             A  all    02/20/07 Corrected equation 16-14

                                   Added table of failure modes, added base

16             B  all    02/01/11  failure rate list for types of fasteners,
                                   modified procedure for dynamic loading,

                                   added vibration modifying factor

17             A  17-1   09/15/07  Added introductory material on various types
                  17-10            of couplings and table of service factors

                                   Modified procedure to determine coupling

17             B  17-8   04/01/11 failure rate and added service factor to

                                   coupling failure rate equation.

18             A  all    04/15/11  Added explanatory material on sliding
                                   bearings

                                   Corrected heading of Table 19-3. Revised

19             A  all    12/15/08 base failure rates and prediction procedures

                                   per recent research

19             B  19-9   03/25/11  Revised table of failure rates for sensing
                                   elements

                                   Corrected equation 20-3 removing

                                   contaminant multiplying factor. Expanded

20             A  20-1   09/15/07 introduction to include various types of shafts

                                   and applications. Corrected equation 20-8 to

                                   agree with Figure 20.2

Change Record                      xi
20             B  20-6  12/12/09 Modified stress concentration procedures

                                  Added table of shaft failure modes. Corrected

20             C  all   12/15/10 equations 20-4 and 20-7. Added table of shaft

                                  bending limites.

21             A  21-6  04/03/06  Clarified parameter for Equation 21-3 and
                                  added sections for chain drive evaluation.

21             B  21-10 02/01/11 Added section on belt load rating

22             A  all   04/05/11  Revised procedures for evaluating fluid
                                  conductor failure rates

23             A  all   05/10/08  Corrected base failure rates, added service
                                  multiplying factors

23             B  all   04/25/11 Added references to other Handbook Chapters

                                  Revised chapter to combine FMECA, RCM

24             A  all   09/15/10 and FTA into a Design Analysis of

                                  Equipment Availability

25             D  all   05/01/11 Added new references as needed

Change Record                     xii
                   1 CHAPTER

                   INTRODUCTION

1.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     1.1 PREFACE.......................................................................................................... 1
     1.2 CURRENT METHODS OF PREDICTING RELIABILITY ................................... 1
     1.3 DEVELOPMENT OF THE HANDBOOK ............................................................ 3
     1.4 EXAMPLE DESIGN EVALUATION PROCEDURE............................................ 6

        1.4.1 Poppet Assembly ........................................................................................ 7
        1.4.2 Spring Assembly ......................................................................................... 9
        1.4.3 Seal Assembly........................................................................................... 10
        1.4.4 Combination of Failure Rates .................................................................... 11
     1.5 VALIDATION OF RELIABILITY PREDICTION EQUATIONS .......................... 13
     1.6 SUMMARY ...................................................................................................... 16
     1.7 REFERENCES ................................................................................................ 17

1.1 PREFACE

     The "Handbook of Reliability Prediction Procedures for Mechanical Equipment" has
been developed by the Logistics Technology Support Group, Naval Surface Warfare
Center Carderock Division (NSWCCD) in Bethesda, Maryland. The handbook presents
a new approach for determining the reliability and maintainability (R&M) characteristics
of mechanical equipment. It has been developed to help the user identify equipment
failure modes and potential causes of unreliability in the early design phases of
equipment development, and then to quantitatively evaluate the design for R&M and
determine logistics support requirements.

     A software program called "MechRel" has also been developed. The Handbook
and MechRel software program are available free of charge from NSWCCD. Contact
information is contained in Section 1.6

1.2 CURRENT METHODS OF PREDICTING RELIABILITY

     A reliability prediction is performed in the early stages of a development program to
support the design process. Performing a reliability prediction provides for visibility of
equipment reliability requirements in the early development phase. A well done
prediction also provides an awareness of potential equipment degradation during the

Introduction  1-1  Revision B
equipment life cycle. As a result of performing a reliability prediction, equipment
designs can be improved, costly over-designs prevented and development testing time
optimized.

     Performance of a reliability prediction for electronic equipment is well established by
research and development. For example, MIL-HDBK-217 has been developed for
predicting the reliability of electronic equipment. Development of this document was
made possible because the standardization and mass production of electronic parts has
permitted the creation of valid failure rate data banks for high population electronic
devices. Such extensive sources of quality and reliability information can be used
directly to predict operational reliability while the electronic design is still on the drawing
board.

     A commonly accepted method for predicting the reliability of mechanical equipment
based on a data bank has not been possible because of the wide dispersion of failure
rates which occur for apparently similar components. Inconsistencies in failure rates for
mechanical equipment are the result of several basic characteristics of mechanical
components:

a. Individual mechanical components such as valves and gearboxes often perform
more than one function and failure data for specific applications of nonstandard
components are seldom available. A hydraulic valve for example may contain a
manual shut-off feature as well as an automatic control mechanism on the same
valve structure.

b. Failure rates of mechanical components are not usually described by a constant
failure rate distribution because of wear, fatigue and other stress-related failure
mechanisms resulting in equipment degradation. Data gathering is complicated
when the constant failure rate distribution can not be assumed and individual times
to failure must be recorded in addition to total operating hours and total failures.

c. Mechanical equipment reliability is more sensitive to loading, operating mode and
utilization rate than electronic equipment reliability. Failure rate data based on
operating time alone are usually inadequate for a reliability prediction of mechanical
equipment.

d. Definition of failure for mechanical equipment depends upon its application. For
example, failure due to excessive noise or leakage can not be universally
established. Leakage requirements for a water system are obviously different than
those for a fuel system. Lack of such information in a failure rate data bank limits its
usefulness.

     The above deficiencies in a failure rate data base result in problems in applying
published failure rates to an actual design analysis. The most commonly used tools for
determining the reliability characteristics of a mechanical design can result in a useful
listing of component failure modes, system level effects, critical safety related issues,

Introduction  1-2  Revision B
and projected maintenance actions. However, estimating the design life of mechanical
equipment is a difficult task for the design engineer. Many life-limiting failure modes
such as corrosion, erosion, creep, and fatigue operate on the component at the same
time and have a synergistic effect on reliability. Also, the loading on the component
may be static, cyclic, or dynamic at different points during the life cycle and the severity
of loading may also be a variable. Material variability and the inability to establish an
effective data base of historical operating conditions such as operating pressure,
temperature, and vibration further complicate life estimates.

     Although several analytical tools such as the Failure Modes, Effects and Criticality
Analysis (FMECA) are available to the engineer, they have been developed primarily for
electronic equipment evaluations, and their application to mechanical equipment has
had limited success. The FMECA, for example, is a very powerful technique for
identifying equipment failure modes, their causes, and the effect each failure mode will
have on system performance. Results of the FMECA provide the engineer with a
valuable insight as to how the equipment will fail; however, the problem in completing
the FMECA for mechanical components is determining the probability of occurrence for
each identified failure mode.

     The above listed problems associated with acquiring failure rate data for mechanical
components demonstrates the need for reliability prediction models that do not rely
solely on existing failure rate data banks. Predicting the reliability of mechanical
equipment requires the consideration of its exposure to the environment and subjection
to a wide range of stress levels such as impact loading. The approach to predicting
reliability of mechanical equipment presented in this Handbook considers the intended
operating environment and determines the effect of that environment at the lowest part
level where the material properties can also be considered. The combination of these
factors permits the use of engineering design parameters to determine the design life of
the equipment in its intended operating environment and the rate and pattern of failures
during the design life. The Handbook also includes a procedure for performing a design
analysis of equipment availability that combines the procedures for performing a
FMECA, a Fault Tree analysis (FTA) and a Reliability Centered Maintenance (RCM)
analysis into one streamlined design analysis procedure for mechanical equipment.

1.3 DEVELOPMENT OF THE HANDBOOK

     Useful models must provide the capability of predicting the reliability of all types of
mechanical equipment by specific failure mode considering the operating environment,
the effects of wear and other potential causes of degradation. The models developed
for the Handbook are based upon identified failure modes and their causes. The first
step in developing the models was the derivation of equations for each failure mode
from design information and experimental data as contained in published technical
reports and journals. These equations were simplified to retain those variables affecting
reliability as indicated from field experience data. Modification factors were then
compiled for each variable to reflect its quantitative impact on the failure rate of an

Introduction  1-3                Revision B
individual component part. The total failure rate of the component is the sum of the
failure rates for the component parts for a particular time period in question. Failure rate
equations for each component part, the methods used to generate the models in terms
of failures per hour or failures per cycle and the limitations of the models are discussed
in each chapter of the Handbook. The equations and procedures were validated to the
extent possible with laboratory testing or engineering analysis.

     The objective of the Handbook and MechRel software program is to provide
procedures which can be used for the following elements of a reliability program:

· Evaluate designs for reliability in the early stages of development

· Provide management emphasis on reliability with standardized evaluation
   procedures

· Provide an early estimate of potential spare parts requirements

· Quantify critical failure modes for initiation of specific stress or design analyses

· Provide a relative indication of reliability for performing trade off studies,
   selecting an optimum design concept or evaluating a proposed design change

· Determine the degree of degradation with time for a particular component or
   potential failure mode

· Design accelerated testing procedures for verification of reliability performance

     One of the problems any engineer can have in evaluating a design for reliability is
attempting to predict performance at the system level. The problem of predicting the
reliability of mechanical equipment is easier at the lower indenture levels where a
clearer understanding of design details affecting reliability can be achieved. Predicting
the life of a mechanical component, for example, can be accomplished by considering
the specific wear, erosion, fatigue and other deteriorating failure mechanism, the
lubrication being used, contaminants which may be present, loading between the
surfaces in contact, sliding velocity, area of contact, hardness of the surfaces, and
material properties. All of these variables would be difficult to record in a failure rate
data bank; however, the derivation of such data can be achieved for individual designs
and the potential operating environment can be brought down through the system level
and the effects of the environmental conditions determined at the part level.

     The development of design evaluation procedures for mechanical equipment
includes mathematical equations to estimate the design life of mechanical components.
These reliability equations consider the design parameters, environmental extremes,
and operational stresses to predict the reliability parameters. The equations rely on a
base failure rate derived from laboratory test data where the exact stress levels are
known. Engineering equations are used to modify this failure rate to the appropriate
stress/strength and environmental relationships for the equipment application. Figure
1.1 illustrates the method of considering the effects of the environment and the
operating stresses at the lowest indenture level.

Introduction  1-4  Revision B
     A component such as a valve assembly may consist of seals, springs, fittings, and
the valve housing. The design life of the entire mechanical system is accomplished by
evaluating the design at the component and part levels considering the material
properties of each part. The operating environment of the system is included in the
equations by determining its impact at the part level. Some of the component parts may
not have a constant failure rate as a function of time and the total system failure rate of
the system can be obtained by adding part failure rates for the time period in question.

                            Figure 1.1 Mechanical Components and Parts

     Many of the parts are subject to wear and other deteriorating type failure
mechanisms and the reliability equations must include the parameters which are readily
accessible to the equipment designer. As part of this research project, Louisiana Tech
University was tasked to establish an engineering model for mechanical wear which is
correlated to the material strength and stress imposed on the part. This model for
predicting wear considers the materials involved, the lubrication properties, the stress
imposed on the part and other aspects of the wear process (Reference 72). The
relationship between the material properties and the wear rate was used to establish
generalized wear life equations for actuator assemblies and other components subject
to surface wear.

Introduction  1-5  Revision B
     In another research project, lubricated and unlubricated spline couplings were
operated under controlled angular misalignment and loading conditions to provide
empirical data to verify spline coupling life prediction models. This research effort was
conducted at the Naval Air Warfare Center in Patuxent River, Maryland (Reference 71).
A special rotating mechanical coupling test machine was developed for use in
generating reliability data under controlled operating conditions. This high-speed closed
loop testbed was used to establish the relationships between the type and volume of
lubricating grease employed in the spline coupling and gear life. Additional tests
determined the effects of material hardness, torque, rotational speed and angular
misalignment on gear life.

     Results of these wear research projects were used to develop and refine the
reliability equations for those components subject to wear.

1.4 EXAMPLE DESIGN EVALUATION PROCEDURE

     A hydraulic valve assembly will be used to illustrate the Handbook approach to
predicting the reliability of mechanical equipment. An example diagram of a valve
assembly is shown in Figure 1.2. Developing reliability equations for all the different
types of hydraulic valves would be an impossible task since there are over one hundred
different types of valve assemblies available. For example, some valves are named for
the function they perform, e.g. check valve, regulator valve and unloader valve. Others
are named for a distinguishing design feature, e.g. globe valve, needle valve, solenoid
valve. However, from a reliability standpoint, dropping down one indenture level
provides two basic types of valve assemblies: the poppet valve and the sliding action
valve.

     The example assembly chosen for analysis is a poppet valve which consists of a
poppet assembly, spring, seals, guide and housing.

Introduction  Figure 1.2 Valve Assembly  Revision B
                            1-6
1.4.1 Poppet Assembly

     The functions of the poppet valve would indicate the primary failure mode as
incomplete closure of the valve resulting in leakage around the poppet seat. This failure
mode can be caused by contaminants being wedged between the poppet and seat,
wear of the poppet seat, and corrosion of the poppet/seat combination. External seal
leakage, sticking valve stem, and damaged poppet return spring are other failure modes
which must be considered in the design life of the valve.

     A new poppet assembly may be expected to have a sufficiently smooth surface for
the valve to meet internal leakage specifications. However, after some period of time
contaminants will cause wear of the poppet assembly until leakage rate is beyond
tolerance. This leakage rate, at which point the valve is considered to have failed, will
depend on the application and to what extent leakage can be tolerated.

     As derived in Chapter 6 of the Handbook, the following equation can be used to
determine the failure rate of a poppet assembly:

              ( ) P = P,B 2 x 102 DM f 3
                   P12 - P22              K1

                            1.5
               ( ) Qf a LW SS

Where:         P = Failure rate of the poppet assembly, failures/million cycles
              P,BB = Base failure rate for poppet assembly, failures/million cycles

              DM = Mean seat diameter, in

                = Mean surface finish of opposing surfaces, in
              P1 = Upstream pressure, lbs/in2
              P2 = Downstream pressure, lbs/in2
              K1 = Constant which considers the impact of contaminant size,

                        hardness and quantity of particles

              Qf = Leakage rate considered to be a valve failure, in3/min

               a = Absolute fluid viscosity, lb-min/in2

              LW = Radial seat land width, in
               SS = Apparent seat stress, lb/in2

Introduction  1-7                             Revision B
     Values used to determine the failure rates for the parts used in this example are
listed in Table 1-1. Throughout the Handbook, failure rate equations for each
component and part are translated into a base failure rate with a series of multiplying
factors to modify the base failure rate to the operating environment being considered.
For example, as shown in Equation (6-6) of Chapter 6, the above equation can be
rewritten as follows:

        PO = PO,B i CP i CQ i CF i C i CN i CS i CDT i CSW i CW

Where:         PO = Failure rate of poppet assembly in failures/million operations

              PO,B = Base failure rate of poppet assembly, 1.40 failures/million

                          operations

                CP = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid pressure

                          on the base failure rate

                CQ = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of allowable

                          leakage on the base failure rate

                CF = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of surface

                          finish on the base failure rate

               C = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid viscosity

                         on the base failure rate

               CN = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of contaminants

                        on the base failure rate

               CS = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of seat stress

                        on the base failure rate

              CDT = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of seat diameter

                        on the base failure rate

              CSW = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of seat land width

                        on the base failure rate

               CW = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid flow rate

                        on the base failure rate

     The parameters in the failure rate equation can be located on an engineering
drawing, by knowledge of design standards or by actual measurement. Other design
parameters which have a minor effect on reliability are included in the base failure rate
as determined from field performance data.

Introduction  1-8                                                Revision B
1.4.2 Spring Assembly

     Depending on the application, a spring may be in a static, cyclic, or dynamic
operating mode. In the current example of a valve assembly, the spring will be in a
cyclic mode. The operating life of a mechanical spring arrangement is dependent upon
the susceptibility of the materials to corrosion and stress levels (static, cyclic or
dynamic). The most common failure modes for springs include fracture due to fatigue
and excessive loss of load due to stress relaxation. Other failure mechanisms and
causes may be identified for a specific application. Typical failure rate considerations
include: level of loading, operating temperature, cycling rate and corrosiveness of the
fluid environment. Other failure modes to be considered are listed in Chapter 4.

     The failure rate of a compression spring depends upon the stress on the spring and
the relaxation properties of the material. The load on the spring is equal to the spring
rate multiplied by the deflection and calculated as explained in Chapter 4.

              PL  =  R ( L1  -  L2 )  =  GM   ( DW )4 ( L1 -  L2 )
                                              8 ( DC )3 Na

Where:         PL = Load, lbs
                R = Spring rate, lb/in
                L1 = Initial deflection of spring, in
                L2 = Final deflection of spring, in
               GM = Modulus of rigidity, lb/in2
              DW = Mean diameter of wire, in
              DC = Mean diameter of spring, in
               Na = Number of active coils

     Stress in the spring will be proportional to loading according to the following
relationship:

              SG  =  8 PL  DC KW
                           DW 3

Where:        SG = Actual stress, psi

Introduction                             1-9                        Revision B
                 KW = Wahl stress correction factor

     This equation permits determination of expected life of the spring by plotting the
material S-N curve on a modified Goodman diagram. In the example valve application,
the spring force and the failure rate remain constant. This projection is valid if the
spring does not encounter temperature extremes. Corrosion is a critical factor in spring
design because most springs are made of steel which is susceptible to a corrosive
environment. In this example the fluid medium is assumed to be non-corrosive and the
spring is always surrounded by the fluid, thus a corrosion factor need not be included in
this analysis. If the valve were a safety device and subjected intermittently to a steam
environment, then a corrosion factor would have to be applied consistent with any
corrosion protection in the original spring design.

     The failure rate of the compression spring can be estimated from the following
equation:

                     SP  =  SP,  B    SG  3  =  SP  ,B    8 PL DC KW  3
                                      TS                    TS DW 3   
                                                                      

where:

TS = Material tensile strength, lbs/in2

Other multiplying factors based on field performance data are detailed in Chapter 4.

1.4.3 Seal Assembly

     The primary failure mode of a seal is leakage, and the following equation as derived
in Chapter 3 uses a similar approach as developed for evaluating a poppet design:

                     SE  = SE,B       K1 (P12 - P22 ) i ro + ri    i H3
                                          Q f  a P2       ro - ri

Where:         SE = Failure rate of seal, failures/million cycles
              SE,B = Base failure rate of seal, failures/million cycles

                  K1 = Constant = 3.27 x 10-4

Introduction                              1-10                           Revision B
                   P1 = System pressure, lb/in2
                   P2 = Standard atmospheric pressure or downstream pressure, lb/in2
                  Qf = Allowable leakage rate under conditions of usage, in3/min

               a = Absolute fluid viscosity, lb-min/in2

                   ri = Inside radius of circular interface, in
                   ro = Outside radius of circular interface, in
                   H = Conductance parameter (Meyer hardness M; contact pressure C;

                               surface finish ), in

     The conductance parameter is a combination of Meyer hardness, contact pressure
and surface finish per the following equation:

              H  =  0.23    M  1.5  ·  f  2/3
                            C  

Where:        M = Meyer hardness (or Young's modulus) for rubber

                     and resilient materials, lbs/in2

              C = Contact stress, lbs/in2
               = Surface finish, in

     In the case of an O-ring seal, the failure rate will increase as a function of time
because of gradual hardening of the rubber material. A typical failure rate curve for an
O-ring is shown in Figure 1.2. Multiplying factors considering such parameters as fluid
temperature are detailed in Chapter 3.

1.4.4 Combination of Failure Rates

     The addition of failure rates to determine the total valve failure rate depends on the
life of the valve and the maintenance philosophy established. If the valve is to be
discarded upon the first failure, a time-to-failure can be calculated for the particular
operating environment. If, on the other hand, the valve will be repaired upon failure with
the failed part(s) being replaced, then the failure rates must be combined for different
time phases throughout the life expectancy until the wear-out phase has been reached.
The effect of part replacement and overhaul is a tendency toward a constant failure rate
at the system level and will have to be considered in the prediction for the total system.

Introduction        1-11                                          Revision B
     The housing will exhibit an insignificant failure rate, usually verified by experience or
by finite element analysis. Typical values as assumed for the example equations are
listed in Table 1-1.

     After the failure rates are determined for each component part, the rates are
summed to determine the failure rate of the total valve assembly. Because some of the
parameters in the failure rate equation are time dependent, i.e. the failure rate changes
as a function of time, the total failure rate must be determined for particular intervals of
time. In the example of the poppet assembly, nickel plating was assumed with an initial
surface finish of 35  inches. The change in surface finish over a one year time period
for non-acidic fluids such as water, mild sodium chloride solutions, and hydraulic fluids
will be a deterioration to 55  inches. In the case of the O-ring seal, the hardness of the
rubber material will change with age. The anticipated failure rate as a function of time
for the component parts of the valve and the total valve assembly are shown in Figure
1.3.

                        Table 1-1. Typical Values for Failure Rate Equations

          POPPET            SPRING                    SEAL

PARAMETER VALUE       PARAMETER VALUE         PARAMETER VALUE

P,B           1.40    SP,B          23.8      SE,B          2.40
                                    3.35
Qf            0.06    L1            2.28      Qf            0.06
                      L2            11.5 E 6
DM            1.69    GM                      P1            3000

F*            35 E-6                          P2            15

P1            3000    DC            0.58      a             2 E -8

P2            15.0    DW            0.085     ri            0.17
              2 E-8
a             0.85    Na            14        ro            0.35
              4045
LW            1.00    TS            245 E3    M/C **        0.55
Ss            0.5
K1                    PL            29.4      f             35 E-6
Ops/hour      0.35
                      SG            86.2 E 3  H             1.02 E-4
TOTALS:
                      KW            1.219     K1            3.27 E-4
P
                      SP            1.04      SE            1.20

     * Initial value = 35 in; after 8,000 operating hours (4,000 operations) surface finish
        will equal 55 in (Reference 5)

    ** Initial value = 0.55 (hardness, M = 500 psi; contact stress, C = 910 psi); after 1 year
        M estimated to be 575 psi (M/C = 0.63)

Introduction                1-12                      Revision B
1.5 VALIDATION OF RELIABILITY PREDICTION EQUATIONS

     A very limited budget during the development of this handbook prevented the
procurement of a sufficiently large number of components to perform the necessary
failure rate tests for all the possible combinations of loading roughness, operational
environments, and design parameters to reach statistical conclusions as to the accuracy
of the reliability equations. Instead, several test programs were conducted to verify the
identity of failure modes and validate the engineering approach being taken to develop
the reliability equations. For example, valve assemblies were procured and tested at
the Belvoir Research, Development and Engineering Center in Ft. Belvoir, Virginia. The
number of failures for each test was predicted using the equations presented in this
handbook. Failure rate tests were performed for several combinations of stress levels
and results compared to predictions. Typical results are shown in Table 1-2.

               10.0

Failures / Million Hours                             Valve                        Spring
                                                                      Seal

                          1.0

                                               Poppet

                          0.1     500  1000                                 2000  4000    8000
                               0

                                       Valve Operating Hours

                                  Figure 1.3 Combination of Component Failure Rates

Introduction                           1-13                                               Revision B
              Table 1-2. Sample Test Data for Validation of Reliability
                               Equations for Valve Assemblies

 TEST VALVE         TEST     ACTUAL    AVERAGE     PREDICTED             FAILURE
SERIES NUMBER     CYCLES                                                 MODE #
                           FAILURES/   FAILURES/   FAILURES/
                      TO   106 CYCLES  106 CYCLES  106 CYCLES
                  FAILURE

15            11  68,322   14.64       14.64       18.02                 3

24            8   257,827                                                1

24            9   131,126 7.63         10.15       10.82                 1

24            10  81,113   12.33                                         1

24            11  104                                                    2

24            12  110,488 9.05                                           1

24            13  86,285   11.59                                         1

25            14  46,879   21.33       19.67       8.45                  2

25            15  300                                                    3

25            18  55,545 18.00                                           1

TEST PARAMETERS:                       FLUID FLOW: 100% rated
            SYSTEM PRESSURE: 3500 psi  FLUID: Hydraulic, MIL-H-83282
            FLUID TEMPERATURE: 90 C

FAILURE MODE:
            1 - Spring Fatigue
            2 - No Apparent
            3 - Accumulated Debris

     Another example of reliability tests performed during development of the handbook
is the testing of gearbox assemblies at the Naval Air Warfare Center in Patuxent River,
Maryland (Reference 70). A spiral-bevel right angle reducer type gearbox with 3/8 inch
steel shaft was selected for the test. Two models having different speed ratios were
chosen, one gearbox rated at 12 in-lbs torque at 3600 rpm and the other gearbox rated
at 9.5 in-lbs torque. Prior to testing the gearboxes, failure rate calculations were made
using the reliability equations from this handbook. Test results were compared with
failure rate calculations and conclusions made concerning the ability of the equations to
be used in calculating failure rates.

     Reliability tests were also performed on stock hydraulic actuators using a special-
purpose actuator wear test apparatus (Reference 72). The actuators used in this
validation project had a 2.50 inch bore, a 5.0 inch stroke, and a nominal operating

Introduction                    1-14                      Revision B
pressure of 3000 psig. Various loads and lubricants were used to correlate test results
with Handbook prediction procedures and equations. The effect of contamination of the
oil was correlated by adding 10 micron abrasive particles to the lubricant in the
actuators.

     Additional reliability tests were performed during development of the handbook on
air compressors for 4000 hours under six different environmental conditions to correlate
the effect of the environment on mechanical reliability (Reference 73). The air
compressors procured for the test were small reciprocating compressors with a
maximum pressure of 35 psi and a ft3 rating of 0.35. The units were subjected to
temperature extremes, blowing dust, and AC line voltage variations while operating at
maximum output pressure. The data collected were used to verify the reliability
equations for reciprocating compressors.

      In another reliability test, a special environmentally controlled test chamber was
constructed at the Naval Air Warfare Center in Patuxent River, Maryland to test gear
pumps and centrifugal pumps (References 74 and 75). A series of bronze rotary gear
pumps were operated for 8000 hours to collect data on operation under controlled
hydraulic conditions. Tests were conducted under high temperature water, low
temperature water, and water containing silicon dioxide abrasives. Data were collected
on flow rates, and seal leakage while pump speed, output pressure, and fluid
temperature were held constant. Similar tests were conducted on a series of centrifugal
pumps.

     To further evaluate wear mechanisms and their effect on mechanical reliability,
fifteen impact wrenches were operated to failure with a drum brake providing frictional
torque and inertial torque loading (Reference 76). The impact wrenches selected for
testing were general purpose, 1/2 inch drive, pneumatic impact wrenches commonly
found in Naval repair shops. This wrench is rated for 200 lb-ft of torque and uses 4 cfm
at 90 psi of air. Results of these reliability tests were used to evaluate the utility of the
related failure equations in the handbook.

     Validation of the various reliability equations for brakes and clutches was
accomplished with tests conducted at Louisiana Tech University by evaluating the wear
process for the various elements used in disk and drum brakes and multiple-disk
clutches (Reference 77). Two types of experimental tests were conducted in
connection with development of the model: (a) abrasive wear tests and (b)
measurements of the coefficient of friction. Brakes and clutches were tested while
monitoring the rate of wear for various materials including asbestos-type composite,
sintered resin composite, sintered bronze composite, carbon-carbon composite, cast
iron, C1040 carbon steel, 17-4 PH stainless steel, and 9310 alloy steel. The number of
passes required to initiate measurable wear for the various types of brakes and clutches
were correlated to the models contained in this handbook.

     Robins AFB, one of the sponsors of the project to develop this handbook, provided
an MC-2A air compressor unit for validation testing of the handbook procedures. The

Introduction  1-15  Revision B
MC-2A is a diesel engine-driven, rotary vane compressor mounted in a housed mobile
trailer. It is designed for general flight line activities such as operating air tools requiring
air from 5 psig to 250 psig. Two objectives were established for the validation effort: (a)
determine the utility of the handbook to effect significant improvements in the reliability
of new mechanical designs, and (b) determine the reliability of the MC-2A in its intended
operating environment and introduce any needed design modifications for reliability
improvement (References 78 and 79).

     An additional reliability test was performed at the Naval Air Warfare Center in
Patuxent River, Maryland to verify the application of the handbook in identifying existing
and impending faults in mechanical equipment. A commercial actuator assembly was
purchased and its design life estimated using the equations in this handbook. The
actuator was then placed on test under stress conditions and an inspection made at the
minimum calculated design life taking into consideration the sensitive parameters in the
reliability equations. Upon inspecting the actuator at this point in time a revised
remaining life estimate of the actuator was made and the test continued until failure.
Test results were then compared with estimated values. The purpose of this test was to
demonstrate the use of the handbook equations to revise failure estimates based on
actual operating conditions when they may be different than originally anticipated and to
continually obtain a more accurate estimate of time before the next maintenance action
will be required (Reference 80).

     An application of the methodology included in this Handbook to a
diagnostic/prognostic system was demonstrated at the Naval Surface Warfare Center in
West Bethesda, Maryland. Sensors were placed on various components of a water
purification system being designed and tested at the laboratory. Equations as
contained in this Handbook were then loaded into a laptop computer so that a real time
determination of the remaining life of critical components could be made. Results of the
experiment demonstrated that the application of prognostics to cognitive-based
maintenance systems achieves the goal of performing maintenance actions only when
there is objective evidence that the equipment requires attention. The result is a
minimally manned, low maintenance and self-sufficient platform.

1.6 SUMMARY

     The procedures presented in this handbook should not be considered as the only
methods for a design analysis. An engineer needs many evaluation tools in his toolbox
and new methods of performing dynamic modeling, finite element analysis and other
stress/strength evaluation methods must be used in combination to arrive at the best
possible reliability prediction for mechanical equipment.

     The examples included in this introduction are intended to illustrate the point that
there are no simplistic approaches to predicting the reliability of mechanical equipment.
Accurate predictions of reliability are best achieved by considering the effects of the

Introduction  1-16  Revision B
operating environment of the system at the part level. The failure rates derived from
equations as tailored to the individual application then permits an estimation of design
life for any mechanical system. It is important to realize that the failure rates estimated
using the equations in this handbook are time dependent and that failure rates for
mechanical components must be combined for the time period in question to achieve a
total equipment failure rate. Section 1.3 and specifically Figure 1.2 demonstrate this
requirement.

     It will be noted upon review of the equations that some of the parameters are very
sensitive in terms of life expectancy. The equations and prediction procedures were
developed using all known data resources. Additional research is needed to obtain
needed information on some of these "cause and effect" relationships for use in
continual improvement to the Handbook. In the meantime, the value of the Handbook
lies in understanding these "cause and effect" relationships so that when a discrepancy
does occur between predicted and actual failure rate, the cause is immediately
recognized. It is hoped that users of the Handbook and the MechRel software program
will communicate observed discrepancies in the Handbook and suggestions for
improvement to the Naval Surface Warfare Center. Suggestions, comments and
questions should be directed to:

Tyrone L. Jones
MechRel Program Manager
Code 2120
Naval Surface Warfare Center
9500 MacArthur Blvd
West Bethesda, MD 20817-5700

Telephone: 301-227-4383

E-mail: Tyrone.L. Jones@.navy.mil

1.7 REFERENCES

28. MIL-HDBK-217, "Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment".

70. "Validation of Gearbox Reliability Models from Test Data", Report No. 87-D-0075,
      October, 1987, Eagle Technology, Inc.

71. Dennis N. Pratt, "Investigation of Spline Coupling Wear", Report No. SY-51R-87,
      December 1987, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, Maryland

72. Randall F. Barron, "Engineering Model for Mechanical Wear", Report No. CMLD-
      CR-09-88, June 1988, Louisiana Tech University

Introduction  1-17  Revision B
73. Dennis Pratt, "Results of Air Compressor Reliability Investigation", Report No. TM
      88-38 SY, January 1989, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, Maryland

74. D. Pratt, "Results of Gear Pump Reliability Investigation", Report No. TM 89-24 SY,
      February 1990, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, Maryland

75. D. Pratt, "Results of Centrifugal Pump Reliability Investigation", Report No. TM 89-
      69 SY, February 1990, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, Maryland

76. D. Pratt, "Results of Pneumatic Impact Wrench Reliability Investigation", Report No.
      TM 90-88 SY, December 1990, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River,
      Maryland

77. Randall F. Barron and Herbert G. Tull, III, "Failure Rate Model for Aircraft Brakes
      and Clutches", Report No. DTRC-CMLD-CR-01-90, August 1990, Louisiana Tech
      University

78. CDNSWC, "Interim Reliability Report on the MC-2A Compressor Unit", January,
      1992

79. D. Pratt, "Results of Air Force MC-2A Air Compressor Unit Reliability Investigation",
      Report No. TM 92-89 SY, March 1993, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River,
      Maryland

80. D. Pratt, "Results of Dayton 5A701 Linear Actuator Reliability Investigation",
      Report No. TM 93-89 SY, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, Maryland
      (1994)

81. TD 84-3 R&M Data for Industrial Plants, A.P. Harris and Associates, 1984

Introduction  1-18  Revision B
                     2 CHAPTER

                                                   DEFINITIONS

     This chapter provides a definition of some basic engineering terms to help establish
a reference for the engineering analysis of mechanical equipment.

Abrasive Wear - The removal of material from a surface by the sliding or rolling of hard
particles across the surface under pressure.

Adhesive Wear - The removal of material from a surface by the welding together and
subsequent shearing of two surface areas that slide across each other under pressure.

Anodizing - The forming of a conversion coating on a metal surface (usually aluminum)
by anodic oxidation.

Armature - The portion of the magnetic structure of a DC or universal motor which
rotates

Axial Thrust - The force or loads that are applied to a shaft in a direction parallel to the
axis of the shaft (such as from a fan or pump).

BB10 Life - The number of hours at a given load that 90 percent of a set of apparently
identical bearings will complete or exceed.

Base Failure Rate - A failure rate for a component or part in failures per million hours or
failures per million operations depending on the application and derived from a data
base where the exact design, operational, and environmental parameters are known.
Multiplying factors are then used to adjust the base failure rate to the new operating
environment.

Bending Moment - The algebraic sum of the moments of the external forces to the left
or right of any section on a member subjected to bending by transverse forces.

Boring - A machining method using a single point tool on internal surfaces of revolution.

Brake Lining - A frictional material used for stopping or retarding the relative movement
of two surfaces.

Definitions  2-1  Revision A
Cathodic protection ­ A technique used to control the corrosion of a metal surface by
making it the cathode of an electrochemical cell.

Cavitation - The formation and instantaneous collapse on innumerable tiny voids within
a liquid subjected to rapid and intense pressure changes.

Cavitation Damage - Erosion of a solid surface through the formation and collapse of
cavities in an adjacent liquid.

Center Distance - The distance between centers of two gears.

Coefficient of Friction - This relationship is the ratio between two measured forces.
The denominator is the normal force pressing two surfaces together. The numerator is
the frictional force resisting the motion of one surface over the other.

Compressive Strength - The maximum compressive stress that a material is capable
of developing based on the original area of cross section.

Contamination - Foreign matter or particles in a fluid system that are transported
during its operation and which may be detrimental to system performance or even
cause failure of a component.

Corrosion - The slow deterioration of materials by chemical agents and/or
electromechanical reactions.

Corrosion Fatigue ­ Cracking produced by the combined action of repeated or
fluctuating stress and a corrosive environment.

Creep - Continuous increase in deformation under constant or decreasing stress.

Dependent Failure - Failure caused by failure of an associated item or by a common
agent.

Diaphragm ­ A member made of rubber or similar material used to contain hydraulic
fluid within the forming cavity and to transmit pressure to the part being formed.

Dirt lock - Complete impedance of movement caused by stray contaminant particles
wedged between moving parts.

Durometer - A device used to measure the hardness of rubber compounds.

Duty Cycle - The ratio of "on-time" to "on time + off time", usually expressed as a
percentage.

Elastic Limit - The greatest stress at which a material is capable of withstanding
without any permanent deformation after removal of the load

Definitions  2-2                                              Revision A
Endurance Limit - The stress level value when plotted as a function of the number of
stress cycles at which point a constant stress value is reached. This is the maximum
stress below which it can be assumed the material can endure an indefinite number of
stress cycles.

External leakage - Leakage resulting in loss of fluid to the external environment.

Failure Mode - The indicator or symptom by which a failure is evidenced.

Failure Rate - The probable number of times that a given component will fail during a
given period of operation under specified operating conditions. Failure rate may be in
terms of time, cycles, revolutions, miles, etc.

Fatigue - The cracking, fracture or breakage of mechanical material due to the
application of repeated, fluctuating or reversed mechanical stress less than the tensile
strength of the material.

Fatigue Life - The number of stress cycles that can be sustained prior to failure under
stated conditions.

Fatigue Limit - The maximum stress that presumably leads to fatigue fracture in a
specified number of stress cycles.

Fatigue Strength - The maximum stress that can be sustained for a specified number
of cycles without failure.

Fretting (or Fretting Corrosion) ­ Surface pitting caused by contacting asperities on
mating surfaces. Corrosion damage occurs at the asperities of contact surfaces. It is
caused by the combination of corrosion and the abrasive effects of debris in equipment
with moving parts.

Friction Material - A product manufactured to resist sliding contact between itself and
another surface in a controlled manner.

Gear - The larger of two meshed gears. If both gears are the same size they are both
referred to as "gears". See pinion

Hardness - A measure of material resistance to permanent or plastic deformation equal
to a given load divided by the resulting area of indentation.

Hooke's Law - Stress is proportional to strain. The law holds only up to the
proportional limit.

Definitions  2-3  Revision A
Hydrogen Embrittlement - The process by which high-strength steel becomes brittle
and fractures following exposure to hydrogen. Hydrogen embrittlement is often the
result of unintentional introduction of hydrogen into susceptible metals during forming or
finishing operations.

Hysteresis ­ When a ferromagnetic material is magnetized in one direction, it will not
relax back to zero magnetization when the imposed magnetizing field is removed. It
must be driven back to zero by a field in the opposite direction. The lack of
retraceability of the magnetization curve is the property called hysteresis and it is
related to the existence of magnetic domains in the material.

Independent Failure - A failure of a device which is not caused by or related to failure
of another device.

Inductance - The characteristic of an electric circuit by which varying current in the
circuit produces a varying magnetic field which causes voltages in the same circuit or in
a nearby circuit.

Internal Leakage - Leakage resulting in loss of fluid in the direction of fluid flow past the
valving unit.

Joint Efficiency - The strength of a welded joint expressed as a percentage of the
strength of the unwelded base metal.

Leakage - The flow of fluid through the interconnecting voids formed when the surfaces
of two materials are brought into contact.

Line of Action - The line along which the point of contact between gear teeth travels,
between the first point of contact and the last.

Lubricant - A substance used to reduce friction between two surfaces in contact.

Mean Cycles Between Failure - The total number of functioning cycles of a population
of parts divided by the total number of failures within the population during the same
period of time. This definition is appropriate for the number of hours as well as for
cycles.

Mean Cycles to Failure - The total number of functioning cycles divided by the total
number of failures during the period of time. This definition is appropriate for the
number of hours as well as for cycles.

Mean Stress - The algebraic mean of the maximum and minimum stress in one cycle.

Definitions  2-4  Revision A
Mil - One thousandth of an inch (0.001 in.)

Mild Steel - Carbon steel with a maximum of about 0.25% carbon.

Modulus of Elasticity ­ A measure of the rigidity of metal. The slope of the initial
linear portion of the stress-strain diagram; the larger the value, the larger the stress
required to produce a given strain. Also known as Young's Modulus. See Meyer
Hardness.

Modulus of Rigidity - The rate of change of unit shear stress with respect to unit shear
strain for the condition of pure shear within the proportional limit. Also called Shear
Modulus of Elasticity.

Meyer Hardness ­ A measurement of the mean pressure between the surface of the
indentor during hardness testing and the indention. Equal to the load divided by the
projected area of the indentation.

Pinion - The smaller of two meshing gears.

Poisson's Ratio - Ratio of lateral strain to axial strain of a material when subjected to
uniaxial loading.

Pressure Angle - The angle between the Line of Action in a gear tooth and a line
perpendicular to the Line of Centers.

Proportional Limit - The maximum stress at which strain remains directly proportional
to stress.

Random Failures - Failures that occur before wear out, are not predictable as to the
exact time of similar and are not associated with any pattern of similar failures.
However, the number of random failures for a given population over a period of time at
a constant failure rate can be predicted.

Reliability - A quantitative measure of the ability of a product to fulfill its intended
function for a specified period of time under stated operating conditions.

Shot Peening - A cold working process used to produce a compressive residual stress
layer and modify mechanical properties of metals. It entails impacting a surface with
shot (round metallic, glass, or ceramic particles) with force sufficient to create plastic
deformation.

Silting - An accumulation and settling of particles during component inactivity.

Smearing - Surface damage resulting from unlubricated sliding contact within a
bearing.

Definitions  2-5  Revision A
S-N diagram - A graph showing the relationship of stress (S) and the number of cycles
(N) before fracture in fatigue testing.

Spalling - The cracking and flaking of particles out of a surface.

Stiction - A change in performance characteristics or complete impedance of poppet or
spool movement caused by wedging of minute particles between a poppet stem and
housing or between spool and sleeve.

Strain - A measure of the relative change in size or shape of a body, usually a
reference to the linear strain in the direction of applied stress.

Stress - Used to indicate any agency that tends to induce "failure". It is a measure of
intensity of force acting on a definite plane passing through a given point, measured in
force per unit area.

Stress-corrosion Cracking - Failure by cracking under combined action of corrosion
and applied or residual stress

Stress Raiser - Change in contour or discontinuity in structure that causes a local
increase in stress

Surface Finish - A measure of the roughness of a surface as a result of final treatment.

Temperature Rise - Some of the electrical energy losses inherent in motors and other
components are converted to heat causing some of the component parts to heat up
while running or activated. The heated parts are at a higher temperature than the
surrounding air causing a rise above ambient temperature. Friction has the same effect
on mechanical component parts such as actuators and shafts.

Tensile Strength - Value of nominal stress obtained when the maximum (or ultimate)
load that the specimen supports is divided by the cross-sectional area of the specimen.
See Ultimate Strength

Thermal Fatigue - Fracture resulting from the presence of thermal gradients producing
cyclic stresses in a structure

Thrust Bearing - Special bearings used to handle higher than normal axial forces
exerted on the shaft of the motor or gearmotor as is the case with some fan or pump
blade mountings

Torque - Turning force delivered by a motor or gearmotor shaft usually expressed in ft-
lbs derived by computing H.P. x 5250/RPM = full load torque

Definitions  2-6  Revision A
Triaxial Stress - A state of stress in which none of the three principal axis stresses is
zero.

Ultimate Strength - The maximum stress (tensile, compressive or shear) the material
will withstand. See Tensile Strength.

Viscosity - A measure of internal resistance of a fluid which tends to prevent it from
flowing.

Wear-out Failure - A failure which occurs as a result of mechanical, chemical or
electrical degradation.

Yield Strength - The stress that will produce a small amount of permanent deformation
in a material, generally a strain equal to 0.1 or 0.2 percent of the length of the specimen.

Young's Modulus - A measure of the rigidity of metal. The slope of the initial linear
portion of the stress-strain diagram; the larger the value, the larger the stress required
to produce a given strain. Also known as Modulus of Elasticity.

Definitions  2-7  Revision A
             This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Definitions  2-8                                 Revision A
                              3 CHAPTER

                        SEALS AND GASKETS

3.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     3.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... 1
     3.2 GASKETS AND STATIC SEALS ....................................................................... 3

        3.2.1 Static Seal Failure Modes ........................................................................... 4
        3.2.2 Failure Rate Model Considerations ............................................................. 4
        3.2.3 Failure Rate Model for Gaskets and Static Seals........................................ 8

           3.2.3.1 Fluid Pressure....................................................................................... 9
           3.2.3.2 Allowable Leakage.............................................................................. 10
           3.2.3.3 Seal Size............................................................................................. 10
           3.2.3.4 Conductance Parameter ..................................................................... 10
           3.2.3.5 Fluid Viscosity..................................................................................... 14
           3.2.3.6 Fluid Operating Temperature.............................................................. 15
           3.2.3.7 Fluid Contaminants............................................................................. 16
           3.2.3.8 Other Design Analysis Considerations ............................................... 16
     3.3 DYNAMIC SEALS............................................................................................ 17
        3.3.1 Dynamic Seal Failure Modes .................................................................... 18
        3.3.2 Pressure Velocity ...................................................................................... 20
        3.3.3 Failure Rate Model for Dynamic Seals ...................................................... 22
           3.3.3.1 Surface Finish Multiplying Factor........................................................ 23
           3.3.3.2 Fluid Contaminant Multiplying Factor.................................................. 23
           3.3.3.3 PV Multiplying Factor.......................................................................... 23
     3.4 MECHANICAL SEALS..................................................................................... 24
        3.4.1 Mechanical Seal Failure Modes ................................................................ 25
        3.4.2 Failure Rate Model for Mechanical Seals.................................................. 27
     3.5 REFERENCES ................................................................................................ 40

3.1 INTRODUCTION

     A seal is a device placed between two surfaces to prevent the flow of gas or liquid
from one region to another. Seals are used for both static and dynamic applications.
Static seals such as gaskets, bolt seals, back-up rings and sealants are used to prevent
leakage through a mechanical joint when there is no relative motion of mating surfaces.
Truly static seals are designed to provide a complete barrier to a potential leakage path.
These seals are "zero leakage" seals (down to 10-11 scc/sec.helium). In a truly static
seal, the mating gland parts are not subject to relative movement except for thermal

Seals and Gaskets  3-1  Revision G
expansion and movement from the application of fluid pressure. Some static seals are
designed to accommodate limited movement of the surfaces being sealed due to
changes in pressure, vibration or thermal cycling such as an expansion joint. These
seals are sometimes referred to as semi-static seals.

     A dynamic seal is a mechanical device used to control leakage of fluid from one
region to another when there is rotating, oscillating or reciprocating motion between the
sealing interfaces. An O-ring can be used in both static and dynamic applications.
However, the employment of O-rings as primary dynamic seals is normally limited to
short strokes and moderate pressures. An example of static and dynamic seal
applications is shown in Figure 3.1.

                   Figure 3.1 Static and Dynamic Seals

     Other seal designs include reciprocating seals, oscillating seals and rotary seals
where movement relative to other mechanical parts will occur. Reciprocating seals
involve relative reciprocating motion along the shaft axis between the inner and outer
elements. In reciprocating seal applications, the O-ring slides or rocks back and forth
within its gland with the reciprocating motion. Reciprocating seals are most often seen
in cylinders and linear actuators. In oscillating seal applications, the inner or outer
member of the gland moves in an arc around the axis of the shaft - first in one direction
and then in the opposite direction, generally intermittently with no more than a few turns
in each direction. The most common application for oscillating O-ring seals is in faucet
valves. Rotary seals involve motion between a shaft and a housing. Typical rotary seals
include motor shafts and wheels on a fixed axle. These specific seal designs are
included in the appropriate section of this chapter as either static of dynamic seals.

     A mechanical seal is designed to prevent leakage between a rotating shaft and its
housing under conditions of higher fluid pressure, shaft speed and temperature normally
associated with dynamic seals. For purposes of this Chapter, a mechanical seal will be
assumed to be rotating in contact with the fluid above 800 rpm or a sliding contact
exceeding 600 feet/minute. A contact sealing face composed of a soft, sacrificial face
material forms a seal against a hard material. A common design has a carbon rotating

Seals and Gaskets  3-2                                  Revision G
element. Failure of a mechanical seal is defined as an inoperative seal before wear-out
of the sacrificial surface.

     The reliability of a seal design is determined by the ability of the seal to restrict the
flow of fluid from one region to another for its intended life in a prescribed operating
environment. The evaluation of a seal design for reliability must include a definition of
the design characteristics and the operating environment in order to estimate its design
life. Section 3.2 discusses the reliability of gaskets and other static seals. Procedures
for evaluating the reliability of dynamic seals are contained in Section 3.3. Procedures
for evaluating mechanical seals for reliability are included in Section 3.4.

3.2 GASKETS AND STATIC SEALS

     A gasket is used to develop and maintain a barrier between mating surfaces of
mechanical assemblies when the surfaces do not move relative to each other. The
barrier is designed to retain internal pressures, prevent liquids and gases from escaping
the assembly, and prevent contaminants from entering the assembly. Gaskets can be
metallic or nonmetallic. Flange pressure compresses the gasket material and causes
the material to conform to surface irregularities in the flange and is developed by
tightening bolts that hold the assembly together.

     Gasket reliability is affected by the type of liquid or gas to be sealed, internal
pressure, temperature, external contaminants, types of surfaces to be joined, surface
roughness, and flange pressure developed at the joint. To achieve the barrier to a
potential leakage path the seal must be sufficiently resilient to conform to cavity
irregularities and imperfections, while remaining rigid enough to provide the required
contact force needed to ensure a tight seal. This contact force is a function of the seal
cross section, as well as the compression of the seal between the mating cavity faces.
The load on the gasket must be distributed evenly over the whole area of the gasket
rather than have a few points of high load with reduced stress at midpoints between the
fasteners. Therefore, a larger number of small bolts is better than a few larger bolts.
Use of a torque wrench during installation is always a necessity.

     An O-ring is a mechanical gasket in the shape of a torus. It is a loop of elastomer
with a disc-shaped cross-section, designed to be seated in a groove and compressed
during assembly between two or more parts, creating a seal at the interface. The
combination of the O-ring and the gland that supports the O-ring constitute the classic
O-ring seal assembly. A typical O-ring configuration is shown in Figure 2.

     While static seals in most cases are designed for "zero-leakage" semi-static seals
for applications where there is limited movement are not designed or intended to be
"zero-leakage" seals. Their contact or compression force is typically an order of
magnitude lower than a static seal.

Seals and Gaskets  3-3  Revision G
                      3.2.1 Static Seal Failure Modes

                           The primary failure mode of a gasket or static seal is
                      leakage. In the case of an O-ring, the O-ring flows up to, but
                      not into, the clearance gap between components under
                      normal pressure. If the pressure is increased, both the
                      sealing force and contact area increase. At the seal pressure
                      limit depending on the seal material and hardness, part of the
                      O-ring starts to extrude into the clearance gap. At this point
                      the seal can shear creating seal leakage.

                      Static seals may also be subjected to high and low

                      temperatures, chemical attack, vibration, abrasion, and

                      movement. The integrity of a seal depends upon the

                      compatibility of the fluid and sealing components, conditions

                      of the sealing environment, and the applied load during

Figure 3.2 Typical application.

O-ring Configuration  A failure mode especially applicable to low pressure

applications is compression set. Compression set refers to the permanent deflection

remaining in the seal after complete release of a squeezing load while exposed to a

particular temperature level. Compression set reflects the partial loss of elastic memory

due to the time effect. Operating over extreme temperatures can result in compression-

type seals such as gaskets and O-rings to leak fluid at low pressures because they

have deformed permanently or taken a set after used for a period of time.

     All seals have an upper temperature limit determined by the type and grade of the
material being used. Thermal expansion can cause misalignment and cause uneven
surfaces that are designed to remain flat. Static seals also undergo plastic deformation
during installation and maintenance procedures need to be reviewed for those situations
where permanent set can take place before permitting the seal to be replaced. Table
3-1 contains a list of typical failure mechanisms and causes of seal leakage. Other
failure mechanisms and causes should be identified for the specific product to assure
that all considerations of reliability are included in any design evaluation.

3.2.2 Failure Rate Model Considerations

     A review of failure rate data suggests the following characteristics be included in the
failure rate model for gaskets and seals:

- Material characteristics
- Amount of seal compression
- Surface irregularities
- Seal size

Seals and Gaskets                3-4                                       Revision G
- Fluid pressure
- Extent of pressure pulses
- Temperature
- Fluid viscosity
- Contamination level
- Fluid/material compatibility
- Leakage requirements
- Assembly/quality control procedures

                   Table 3-1. Typical Failure Mechanisms and Causes
                                    for Static Seals and Gaskets

FAILURE MODE       FAILURE MECHANISMS        FAILURE CAUSES

    Leakage        - Wear                    - Contaminants
                                             - Misalignment
                   - Elastic Deformation     - Vibration
                   - Gasket/seal distortion  - Poor surface finish

                   - Surface Damage          - Extreme temperature
                   - Embrittlement           - Misalignment
                                             - Seal eccentricity
                   - Creep                   - Extreme loading / extrusion
                   - Compression Set         - Compression set/overtorqued bolts
                   - Installation Damage
                   - Gas expansion rupture   - Inadequate lubrication
                                             - Contaminants
                                             - Fluid/seal degradation
                                             - Thermal degradation
                                             - Idle periods between component use
                                             - Exposure to atmosphere, ozone
                                             - Excessive temperature

                                             - Fluid pressure surges
                                             - Material degradation
                                             - Thermal expansion & contraction

                                             - Excessive squeeze to achieve seal
                                             - Incomplete vulcanization
                                             - Hardening/high temperature

                                             - Insufficient lead-in chamfer
                                             - Sharp corners on mating metal parts
                                             - Inadequate protection of spares

                                             - Absorption of gas or liquefied gas
                                              under high pressure

Seals and Gaskets  3-5                                               Revision G
     The failure rate of a static seal is a function of actual leakage and the allowable
leakage under conditions of usage, failure occurring when the rate of leakage reaches a
predetermined threshold. This rate, derived empirically, can be expressed as follows:

                       SE  =  SE , B    Qa                                    (3-1)
                                        Qf    

Where:  SE = Failure rate of gasket or seal considering operating

                   environment, failures per million hours

        SE,B = Base failure rate of seal or gasket due to random cuts,

                   installation errors, etc. based on field experience data,
                   failures per million hours

          Qa = Actual leakage rate, in3/min

          Qf = Allowable leakage rate under conditions of usage, in3/min

     Allowable leakage is dependent on the application. External leakage of a
component containing water is obviously not as critical as one containing fuel.

Allowable leakage, Qf is determined from design drawings, specifications or knowledge
of component applications. The actual leakage rate Qa for a seal is determined from the
standard equation for laminar flow around two curved surfaces (Reference 5):

                     ( ) Qa           
                   =    P12 - P22         ro  +  ri    H  3                   (3-2)
                                          ro  -  ri  
                       25 a P2                       

Where              P1 = System or upstream pressure, lbs/in2

                   P2 = Standard atmospheric pressure or downstream pressure,

                               lbs/in2

                   a = Absolute fluid viscosity, lb-min/in2

                    ri = Inside radius of circular interface, in

                   ro = Outside radius of circular interface, in

                    H = Conductance parameter, in [See Equation (3-4)]

For flat seals or gaskets the leakage can be determined from the following equation:

Seals and Gaskets             3-6                            Revision G
                   ( ) Qa                    
                   =       L P1 2 -  P22      H 3                                  (3-3)
                                     P2
                           12 a w

Where:             w = Width of non-circular flat seals, in
                   L = Contact length, in

   The conductance parameter H is dependent upon contact stress of the two sealing
surfaces, hardness of the softer material and surface finish of the harder material
(Reference 5). First, the contact stress (load/area) is calculated and the ratio of contact
stress to Meyer hardness of the softer interface material computed. The surface finish
of the harder material is then determined. The conductance parameter is computed
from the following empirically derived formula:

                   H  =  0.23    M   1.5  ·  f  2/3                                (3-4)
                                 C   

Where:             M = Meyer hardness (or Young's modulus) for rubber

                          and resilient materials, lbs/in2

                   C = Contact stress, lbs/in2 [See Equation (3-9)]
                    = Surface finish, in

     Seal wear is dependent on the finish of the surface against which the seal rubs
when pressure is applied and released or pressure surges occur. The surface finish, ,
will deteriorate as a function of time at a rate dependent upon several factors:

                   · Seal degradation
                   · Contaminant wear coefficient (in3/particle)
                   · Number of contaminant particles per in3
                   · Flow rate, in3/min

                   · Ratio of time the seal is subjected to contaminants under pressure
                   · Temperature of operation, F

     Note that surface finish and seal hardness are the two parameters in the seal
reliability equation that will change as a function of time. Therefore, estimating the

Seals and Gaskets                   3-7                                Revision G
value of these parameters at different time intervals during the life of the product will
provide an estimate of the total assembly as a function of time.

     The contaminant wear coefficient is an inherent sensitivity factor for the seal or
gasket based upon performance requirements. The quantity of contaminants includes
those produced by wear and ingestion in components upstream of the seal and after the
filter. Combining and simplifying terms provides the following equations for the failure
rate of a seal.

For circular seals:

        ( ) SE                                  H3
                     = SE,B    K1  P12 - P22           ·    ro  +  ri                (3-5)
                                                            ro  -  ri  
                                   Qf  a P2                            

and, for flat seals and gaskets:

                     ( ) SE                                        
                                       K2  P12  - P22   L   H   3  
                                           Qf          P2          
                             = SE,B             a w                                  (3-6)

                                     

Where K1 and K2 are empirically derived constants

3.2.3 Failure Rate Model for Gaskets and Static Seals

     By normalizing the equation to those values for which historical failure rate data
from the Navy Maintenance and Material Management (3-M) system are available, the
following model can be derived:

SE = SE,B · CP · CQ · CDL · CH · CF · C · CT · CN                                    (3-7)

Where:              SE = Failure rate of a seal in failures/million hours

                   SE,B = Base failure rate of seal, 2.4 failures/million hours

                     CP = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid pressure

                                on the base failure rate (Figure 3.10)

Seals and Gaskets                               3-8                      Revision G
                    CQ = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of allowable

                             leakage on the base failure rate (See Figure 3.11)

                   CDL = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of seal size

                             on the base failure rate (See Figure 3.12 for seals or
                              Figure 3.13 for gaskets )

                    CH = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of contact stress

                             and seal hardness on the base failure rate (See Figure 3.14)

                    CF = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of seat

                              smoothness on the base failure rate (See Figure 3.15)

                    C = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid viscosity

                             on the base failure rate (See Table 3-3)

                    CT = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of temperature

                             on the base failure rate (See Figure 3.16)

                    CN = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of contaminants

                             on the base failure rate (See Table 3-4)

     The parameters in the failure rate equation can be located on an engineering
drawing, by knowledge of design standards or by actual measurement. Design
parameters other than the above multiplying factors which have a minor effect on
reliability are included in the base failure rate as determined from field performance
data. The following paragraphs provide background information on those parameters
included in the model.

3.2.3.1 Fluid Pressure

     Figure 3.10 provides fluid pressure multiplying factors for use in the model. Fluid
pressure on a seal will usually be the same as the system pressure. The fluid pressure
at the sealing interface required to achieve good mating depends on the resiliency of
the sealing materials and their surface finish. It is the resilience of the seal which
insures that adequate sealing stress is maintained while the two surfaces move in
relation to one another with thermal changes, vibration, shock and other changes in the
operating environment. The reliability analysis should include verification that sufficient
pressure will be applied to affect a good seal.

     At least three checks should be made to assure the prevention of seal leakage:

          (1) One surface should remain relatively soft and compliant so that it will
                readily conform to the irregularities of the harder surface

Seals and Gaskets  3-9  Revision G
          (2) Sufficient sealing load should be provided to elastically deform the softer
               of the two sealing surfaces

          (3) Sufficient smoothness of both surfaces is maintained so that proper
               mating can be achieved

3.2.3.2 Allowable Leakage

     Figure 3.11 provides an allowable leakage multiplying factor for use in Equation 3-
7. Determination of the acceptable amount of leakage which can be tolerated at a seal
interface can usually be obtained from component specifications. The allowable rate is
a function of operational requirements and the rate may be different for an internal or
external leakage path.

3.2.3.3 Seal Size

    Figure 3.5 shows a typical installation for a seal and the measurements for ri and ro.

For a gasket, the inside perimeter dimension w and the contact length L are used in the
equation. Figures 3.12 and 3.13 show the effect of seal size on reliability. The inside
diameter of the seal is used in Figure 3.12 as a close approximation of the seal size.

3.2.3.4 Conductance Parameter

     Three factors comprise the conductance parameter:
          (1) Hardness of the softer material
          (2) Contact stress of the seal interface
          (3) Surface finish of the harder material

     (1) Hardness of the softer material: - In the case of rubber gaskets and O-rings, the
hardness of rubber is measured either by durometer or international hardness methods.
Both hardness test methods are based on the measurement of the penetration of a rigid
ball into a rubber specimen. Throughout the seal/gasket industry, the Shore A
durometer is the standard instrument used to measure the hardness of rubber
compounds. The durometer has a calibrated spring which forces an indentor point into
the test specimen against the resistance of the rubber. The scale of hardness is from 0
degrees for elastic modulus of a liquid to 100 degrees for an infinite elastic modulus of a
material, such as glass. Readings in International Rubber Hardness Degree (IRHD) are
comparable to those given by a Shore A durometer (Reference18) when testing
standard specimens per the ASTM methods. The relationship between the rigid ball
penetration and durometer reading is shown in Figure 3.3.

Seals and Gaskets  3-10  Revision G
        Movement of Plunger, inches  0.08
                                     0.07
                                     0.06
                                     0.05
                                     0.04
                                     0.03
                                     0.02
                                     0.01
                                     0.00

                                           25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
                                                                        IRHD/Durometer, degrees, Shore A

        Figure 3.3 Relation Between International Rubber Hardness
                         Degree (IRHD) and Rigid Ball Penetration

     Well-vulcanized elastic isotropic materials, like rubber seals manufactured from
natural rubbers and measured by IRHD methods, have a known relationship to Young's
modulus. The relation between a rigid ball penetration and Young's modulus for a
perfectly elastic isotropic material is (Reference 18):

                                      F1  = 1.90  Rp2    PD  1.35                                         (3-8)
                                     MP                  RP  
                                                             

Where:                                Fl = Indenting force, lbf
                                     Mp = Young's modulus, lbs/in2
                                     RP = Radius of ball, in
                                     PD = Penetration, in

Seals and Gaskets                                      3-11         Revision G
     Standard IRHD testers have a ball radius of 0.047 inches with a total force on the
ball of 1.243 lbf. Using these testing parameters, the relationship between seal
hardness and Young's modulus is shown in Figure 3.4. Since Young's modulus is
expressed in lbs/in2 and calculated in the same manner as Meyer's hardness for rigid
material; then, for rubber materials, Young's modulus and Meyer's hardness can be
considered equivalent.

Young's Modulus, lbs/in2  3500
                          3000
                          2500
                          2000
                          1500
                          1000

                           500
                               0
                                 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
                                                             IRHD/Durometer, degrees (Shore A)

                          Figure 3.4 Seal Hardness and Young's Modulus

       (2) Surface finish of the harder material: - For a gasket, the surface finish of the
two surfaces containing the gasket govern the thickness and compressibility necessary
for the gasket material for completing a physical barrier in the clearance gap between
the flanges. Flatness of the surfaces being sealed is an important consideration.
Reliability of the gasket is dependent on the type of material for the specific fluid and
application. For seals contained in a gland, as pressure is applied to the fluid
component, the O-ring will tend to roll in the gland and a gasket will tend to move
between the retaining hardware. The surface finish on the gland will usually be about
32 microinches for elastomer seals, 16 microinches for plastic seals and 8 microinches
for metals. In addition to average surface finish, the allowable number and magnitude
of flaws in the gland must be considered in projecting leakage characteristics. Flaws
such as surface cracks, ridges or scratches will have a detrimental effect on seal
leakage. When projecting seal and gasket failure rates for different time periods of the

Seals and Gaskets         3-12                                          Revision G
equipment life cycle, it is important to consider the exposure to contaminants and their
effect on surface finish.

       (3) Contact stress of the seal interface: - Seals deform to mate with rigid surfaces
by elastic deformation. Since the deformation of the seal is almost entirely elastic, the
initially applied seating load must be maintained. Thus, a load margin must be applied
to allow for strain relaxation during the life of the seal yet not to the extent that
permanent deformation takes place. An evaluation of cold flow characteristics is
required for determining potential seal leakage of soft plastic materials. Although
dependent on surface finish, mating of metal-to-metal surfaces generally requires a
seating stress of two to three times the yield strength of the softer material. Figure 3.5
shows a typical installation of a gasket seal.

                                                                   FC

SEAL                               FLANGE

                                                            P2

                                            P1

                                                  ri
                                                    ro

                   Figure 3.5 Typical Seal Installation

     If the seal is pressure energized, the force FC applied to the seal must be sufficient
to balance the fluid pressure forces acting on the seal and thus, prevent separation of
the interface surfaces. This requirement is determined by the maximum applied fluid
pressure, geometry of the seal groove and pressure gradient at the interface due to
leakage. Motion at the interface is prevented by the radial friction forces at the interface
to counter the fluid pressure forces tending to radially deform the seal. Thus, the radial
restraining force FC will be greater than the radial pressure deformation forces.

     The contact stress, C, in lbs/in2 can be calculated by:

                   C = FC                                                   (3-9)
                        ASC

Seals and Gaskets            3-13                               Revision G
Where:             FC = Force compressing seals, lb
or:                ASC = Area of seal contact, in2

                      FC - P1   ri2  -  ( P1  -  P2 )    ro  +  ri    ( ro  -  ri )
                                                             2      
        ( ) C      =                                                                             (3-10)
                                         ro2 - ri2

Where:  P1 = System pressure, lbs/in2
        P2 = Standard atmospheric pressure or downstream pressure, lbs/in2
        ro = Outside seal radius, in
        ri = Inside seal radius, in

     For most seals, the force compressing the seal FC is normally two and one-half
times the Young's modulus for the material. If too soft a material is used, the seal
material will have insufficient strength to withstand the forces induced by the fluid and
will rapidly fail by seal blowout. If the seal is too hard it will not sufficiently deform in the
gland and immediate leakage will occur.

3.2.3.5 Fluid Viscosity

     Viscosity of a fluid is much more dependent on temperature than it is on pressure.
For example, when air pressure is increased from 1 atmosphere to 50, its viscosity is
only increased by about 10%. In contrast, Figure 3.6 shows the dependence of
viscosity on temperature for some common fluids. The graph shows how viscosity of
liquids decreases with temperature while that of gases increases with temperature.
Multiplying factors for the effect of fluid viscosity on the base failure rate of seals and
gaskets are provided in Table 3-3. Viscosities for other fluids at the operating
temperature can be found in referenced sources and the corresponding multiplying
factor determined using the equation following Table 3-3. If the value located is in
terms of kinematic viscosity, multiply the value by the specific gravity (density) at the
desired temperature to determine the dynamic viscosity.

Seals and Gaskets                                3-14                                Revision G
                          10000.000

                          1000.000     SAE 20
                           100.000
Viscosity in Centipoises                            SAE 50

                          10.000

                          1.000                             Diesel Fuel
                                               Water

                          0.100

                                               Air

                          0.010        0.000  50.000 100.000 150.000 200.000 250.000 300.000 350.000
                              -50.000                      Temperature, degrees F

                                     Figure 3.6 Dynamic Viscosities of Various Fluids

3.2.3.6 Fluid Operating Temperature

     Operating temperature has a definite effect on the aging process of elastomer and
rubber seals. Elevated temperatures, those temperatures above the published
acceptable temperature limits, tend to continue the vulcanization or curing process of
the materials, thereby significantly changing the original characteristics of the seal or
gasket. It can cause increased hardening, brittleness, loss of resilience, cracking, and
excessive wear. Since a change in these characteristics has a definite effect on the
failure rate of the component, a reliability adjustment must be made.

     Temperature will have a significant impact on the performance of a gasket since an
increase in temperature will both degrade the physical strength of the material and
deform it so that the bolt load and residual stress are modified. Manufacturers of rubber

Seals and Gaskets                                   3-15                               Revision G
seals will specify the maximum temperature, TR, for their products. Typical values of TR
are given in Table 3-5. An operating temperature multiplying factor can be derived as
follows (Reference 22):

                   CT  =  1                                         (3-11)
                          2t

Where:             t = TR - TO  for (TR ­ TO )  40 oF
And:                     18

        TR = Maximum rated temperature of material, oF
        TO = Operating temperature, oF

        CT = 0.21 for (TR ­ TO ) > 40 oF

3.2.3.7 Fluid Contaminants

     The quantities of contaminants likely to be generated by upstream components are
listed in Table 3-4. The number of contaminants depends upon the design, the
enclosures surrounding the seal, its physical placement within the system, maintenance
practices and quality control. The number of contaminants may have to be estimated
from experience with similar system designs and operating conditions.

3.2.3.8 Other Design Analysis Considerations

     Those failure rate considerations not specifically included in the model but rather
included in the base failure rates are as follows:

· Proper selection of seal materials with appropriate coefficients of thermal
    expansion for the applicable fluid temperature and compatibility with fluid
    medium

· Space between the fasteners of a gasket must be small enough so that an
    even distribution of load is applied to the gasket with fluid pressure

· Potential corrosion from the gland, seal, fluid interface

· Possibility of the seal rolling in its groove when system surges are
    encountered

· If O-rings can not be installed or replaced easily they are subject to being
    cut by sharp gland edges

· Potential periods of dryness between applications of fluid

Seals and Gaskets               3-16                    Revision G
Other factors which need to be considered as a check list for reliability include:
          · Chemical compatibility between fluid and seal material
          · Thermal stability
          · Appropriate thickness and width of the seal material
          · Initial and final seating (clamping) force

3.3 DYNAMIC SEALS

     In contrast to gaskets and other static seals, dynamic seals are used to control the
leakage of fluid in those applications where there is motion between the mating surfaces
being sealed. O-rings used in dynamic applications are subject to a sliding action
against the gland. This motion introduces friction creating different designs and failure
modes from those of static seals. Refer to Section 3.2 for a discussion of seals in
general, the basic failure modes of seals and the parameters used in the equations to
estimate the failure rate of a seal.

     There are several types of dynamic seals including the contacting types such as lip
seals and noncontacting types such as labyrinth seals. Assemblies with motion usually
require lubrication of the O-ring to reduce wear rate. This is usually accomplished with
the fluid being sealed.

     Dynamic seals are further divided as follows:

· Reciprocating Seal: A seal where the rod or piston moves back and forth through
      or with the seal. Piston and rod seals shown in Figure 3.7 are examples of
      reciprocating seals.

· Rotary Seal: A seal where a shaft rotates with relation to the seal. Typical rotary
      seals include motor shafts and wheels on a fixed axle. O-rings are not generally
      used for conditions involving fluid velocities exceeding 800 rpm and/or surface
      speeds exceeding 600 feet/minute. See Figure 3.7.

· Oscillating Seal: A seal where a shaft turns and returns with relation to the seal. In
      this application the inner and outer member of the gland moves in an arc around
      the axis of the shaft first in one direction and then in the opposite direction with the
      movement usually intermittent. An example application is the faucet valve.

Seals and Gaskets  3-17  Revision G
                                                       Rotary Seal

                                     Figure 3.7 Typical Dynamic Seals

     The following paragraphs discuss the specific failure modes and model parameters
for dynamic seals. Mechanical seals are designed to prevent leakage between a
rotating shaft and its housing. The mechanical seal is indicated as the dynamic seal
faces in Figure 3.8. Section 3.4 contains specific information on mechanical seals.

3.3.1 Dynamic Seal Failure Modes

     The dynamic seal may be used to seal many different liquids at various speeds,
pressures, and temperatures. Dynamic seals are made of natural and synthetic
rubbers, polymers and elastomers, metallic compounds, and specialty materials. Wear
and sealing efficiency of fluid system seals are related to the characteristics of the
surrounding operating fluid. Abrasive particles present in the fluid during operation will
have a strong influence on the wear resistance of seals. Seals typically operate with
sliding contact. Elastomer wear is analogous to metal degradation. However,
elastomers are more sensitive to thermal deterioration than to mechanical wear. Hard
particles can become embedded in soft elastomeric and metal surfaces leading to
abrasion of the harder mating surfaces forming the seal, resulting in leakage.

     The most common modes of seal failure are by fatigue-like surface embrittlement,
abrasive removal of material, and corrosion. Wear and sealing efficiency of fluid system
seals are related to the characteristics of the surrounding operating fluid. Abrasive
particles present in the fluid during operation will have a strong influence on the wear
resistance of seals, the wear rate of the seal increasing with the quantity of

Seals and Gaskets                 3-18  Revision G
environmental contamination. A good understanding of the wear mechanism involved
will help determine potential seal deterioration. For example, contaminants from the
environment such as sand can enter the fluid system and become embedded in the
elastomeric seals causing abrasive cutting and damage to shafts.

     Compression set refers to the permanent deflection remaining in the seal after
complete release of a squeezing load while exposed to a particular temperature level.
Compression set reflects the partial loss of elastic memory due to the time effect.
Operating over extreme temperatures can result in compression-type seals such as O-
rings to leak fluid at low pressures because they have deformed permanently or taken a
set after used for a period of time.

     Another potential failure mode to be considered is fatigue failure caused by shaft
run-out. A bent shaft can cause vibration throughout the equipment and eventual loss
of seal resiliency. Typical failure mechanism and causes for dynamic seals are included
in Table 3-2.

                         Table 3-2. Typical Failure Mechanisms and Causes
                                         For Dynamic Seals (Also see Table 3-1)

FAILURE MODE FAILURE MECHANISMS                          FAILURE CAUSES

                              Wear                        - Misalignment
Excessive leakage                                         - Shaft out-of-roundness
                                                          - Excessive shaft end play
                              Dynamic instability         - Excessive torque
                              Embrittlement               - Poor surface finish
                                                          - Contaminants
                              Mechanical spring Failure   - Inadequate lubrication
                              Fracture                    - Excessive rubbing speed
                              Edge chipping
                              Axial shear                - Shaft misalignment

                                                         - Contaminants
                                                         - Fluid/seal incompatibility
                                                         - Thermal degradation
                                                         - Idle periods between use

                                                         - See Chapter 4, Table 4-1

                                                         - Stress-corrosion cracking
                                                         - Excessive PV value
                                                         - Excessive fluid pressure on seal

                                                         - Excessive shaft deflection
                                                         - Seal faces out-of-square
                                                         - Excessive shaft whip

                                                         - Excessive pressure loading

Seals and Gaskets  3-19                                  Revision G
        Table 3-2. (continued) Typical Failure Mechanisms and Causes
                                For Dynamic Seals (Also see Table 3-1)

FAILURE MODE FAILURE MECHANISMS                         FAILURE CAUSES

                            Torsional shear             - Excessive torque due to improper
Excessive leakage Compression set                         lubrication

                            Fluid seepage               - Excessive fluid pressure
                            Seal face distortion
                                                        - Extreme temperature operation
 Slow mechanical Excessive friction
      response                                          - Insufficient seal squeeze
                                                        - Foreign material on rubbing surface

                                                        - Excessive fluid pressure on seal
                                                        - Foreign material trapped between faces
                                                        - Excessive PV value of seal operation
                                                        - Insufficient seal lubrication
                                                        - Seal shrinkage

                                                        - Excessive squeeze
                                                        - Excessive seal swell
                                                        - Seal extrusion
                                                        - Metal ­ to ­ metal contact (out of

                                                          alignment)

3.3.2 Pressure Velocity

     An important factor in the design of dynamic seals is the pressure velocity (PV)
coefficient. The PV coefficient is defined as the product of the seal face or system
pressure and the fluid velocity. This factor is useful in estimating seal reliability when
compared with manufacturer's limits. If the PV limit is exceeded, a seal may wear at a
rate greater than desired.

                   QS = 0.077 i PV i  i aO                                   (3-12)

Where:             QS = Heat input from the seal, BTU/hour
                   PV = Pressure-velocity coefficient [See Equation (3-13)]

                     = Coefficient of friction (See Table 3-6)
                   ao = Seal face area, in2

Seals and Gaskets                                 3-20  Revision G
The following equation defines the PV factor.                                   (3-13)

                        PV =  i DP i d i V i k
                                 12

Where:             PV = Pressure-Velocity, lbs/in2 · ft/min
Or:
                   DP = Pressure differential across seal, lbs/in2

                   d = Diameter of seal, inches

                   V = Operating speed, rpm

                   k = Degree of seal unbalance (1.0 for unbalanced and

        `          0.4 for balanced)

                   PV =  i DP i d i V i k
                          12

Where:             V = Operating speed, ft/min

     The frictional aspects of materials are not only important from a reliability viewpoint.
Performance must also be considered. The more resistance a system incurs, the more
power is lost and also the lower the efficiency value for the component.

     There should be special consideration for tradeoffs involved with each type of seal
material. For example, solid silicon carbide has excellent abrasion resistance, good
corrosion resistance, and moderate thermal shock resistance. This material has better
qualities than a carbon-graphite base material but has a PV value of 500,000 while
carbon-graphite has a 50,000 PV value. With all other values being the same, the heat
generated would be five times greater for solid silicon carbide than for carbon-graphite
materials. The required cooling flow to the solid silicon carbide seal would be larger to
maintain the film thickness on the dynamic seal faces. If this cooling flow can't be
maintained, then an increase in wear would occur due to higher surface temperatures.
A tradeoff analysis is normally performed for each candidate design to maximize
reliability. Typical PV limits are shown in Table 3-7.

Seals and Gaskets  3-21                                             Revision G
3.3.3 Failure Rate Model for Dynamic Seals

     Most of the seal modifying factors will remain the same as the ones previously
specified by Equation (3-7), the exceptions being surface finish (See Section 3.3.3.1)
and the addition of the PV factor for rotational speeds greater than 800 rpm or linear
speeds greater than 600 ft/min (See Section 3.3.3.3). The seal model is modified as
shown in Equation (3-14).

SE = SE,B i CP i CQ i CDL i CH i CF i C i CT i CN i CPV              (3-14)

Where:   SE = Failure rate of dynamic seal in failures/million hours

        SE,B = Base failure rate of dynamic seal, 22.8 failures/million hours

           CP = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid pressure

                    on the base failure rate for seal movement < 800 rpm or
                    600ft/min (See Figure 3.10)

           CP = 1.0 for seal movement  800 rpm or 600ft/min

          CQ = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of allowable

                    leakage on the base failure rate (See Figure 3.11) and Section
                    3.2.3.2

          CDL = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of seal size
                    on the base failure rate (See Figure 3.12) for seal
                    movement < 800 rpm or 600ft/min

         CDL = 1.0 for seal movement  800 rpm or 600 ft/min

          CH = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of contact stress

                    and seal hardness on the base failure rate for movement < 800
                    rpm or 600 ft/min (See Figure 3.14)

          CH = 1.0 for seal movement  800 rpm or 600 ft/min

          CF = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of surface finish on

                    the base failure rate (See Sections 3.3.3.1, 3.2.3.4 and Figure
                    3.17)

          C = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid viscosity

                   on the base failure rate (See Table 3-3 and Section 3.2.3.5)

          CT = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of seal temperature

                    on the base failure rate (See Figure 3.16 and Section 3.2.3.6)

          CN = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of contaminants

                   on the base failure rate (See Table 3-4 and Section 3.3.3.2)

Seals and Gaskets  3-22                                  Revision G
                   CPV = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the pressure-

                                 velocity coefficient on the base failure rate for movement 
                                800 rpm and/or 600 ft/min (See Sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.3.3)

                   CPV = 1.0 for seal movement < 800 rpm or 600 ft/min

3.3.3.1 Surface Finish Multiplying Factor

     Surface irregularities of dynamic seals may be more pronounced than static seals.
In dynamic seal applications where the seal mates with a shaft, shaft hardness,
smoothness and material are factors which must be considered in the design evaluation
process. Maximum seal efficiency and life are obtained with a finely finished gland
surface, usually in the 10 to 20 microinch range. A metal surface finish of less than 8
microinches rms increases the total frictional drag of a compound moving against it. The
degree to which the finish can be maintained in the operating range must be considered
when determining the surface finish of the gland for use in the model. Figure 3.17
provides a value for the surface finish multiplying factor as a function of the surface
finish.

3.3.3.2 Fluid Contaminant Multiplying Factor

     One of the factors in estimating the failure rate of a dynamic seal is the number of
contaminants in contact with the seal generated from other components in the system.
For example, when a cylinder rod extends out into a dirty environment where it can pick
up dirt, lint, metal chips and other contaminants, this foreign material can nullify the
benefits of the lubricant and cause rapid abrasive wear of both the O-ring and the rod.
Equipment exposed to such conditions should contain a wiper ring to prevent the
foreign material from reaching the O-ring. A felt ring is usually installed between the
wiper and the seal to maintain lubrication of the rod during its return stroke.

     Table 3-4 provides fluid contaminant multiplying factors for various components that
may be generating contaminants.

3.3.3.3 PV Multiplying Factor

    CPV is the multiplying factor that multiplies the base failure rate by the ratio of PV
value for actual seal operation to design PV value. CPV is applicable to rotary seals, lip

seals and other dynamic seals that rotate with a shaft or reciprocate with a velocity
greater than 5 in/sec and where a PV design factor is available from the manufacturer.
The values for PVDS and PVOP used in Equation (3-15) will use the PV formulation in
Equation (3-13).

Seals and Gaskets  3-23  Revision G
                   CPV  =  PVOP                                            (3-15)
                           PVDS

Where:             PVOP = PV factor for actual seal operation
                   PVDS = PV factor for the original design

3.4 MECHANICAL SEALS

     Mechanical seals are designed to prevent leakage between flat, rotating surfaces.
A typical contacting type dynamic seal is shown in Figure 3.8. In this example, the
sealing surfaces are perpendicular to the shaft, with contact between the primary and
mating rings to achieve a dynamic seal. Each of the sealing surfaces is lapped flat to
eliminate leakage. Wear occurs at the dynamic seal faces from sliding contact between
the primary and mating rings. The rate of wear is small, as a film of the liquid sealed is
maintained between the sealing faces. Preload from a spring is required to produce an
initial seal, the spring pressure holding the primary and mating rings together during
shutdown or when there is a lack of fluid pressure.

                   Figure 3.8 Typical Mechanical Seal

     Wear occurs between the primary ring and mating ring of a mechanical seal. This
surface contact is maintained by a spring. There is a film of liquid maintained between
the sealing surfaces to eliminate as much friction as possible. For most mechanical
seals, the three common points of sealing contact occur between the following points:

          (1) Mating surfaces between primary and mating rings

(2) Between the rotating component and shaft or sleeve
(3) Between the stationary component and the gland plate

Seals and Gaskets          3-24                                Revision G
     The reliability of a mechanical seal depends to a very large extent on its ability to
maintain a thin fluid film in the gap between the mating faces while simultaneously
minimizing the duration and extent of mechanical contact between asperities on the
rubbing areas of these faces. Too much contact may overheat the materials; not
enough contact may cause high leakage rates.

     A mechanical seal may be an unbalanced design or a balanced design.
Unbalanced seals are seal arrangements in which the hydraulic pressure of the seal
chamber acts on the entire seal face without any of the force being reduced through the
seal design. Unbalanced seals usually have a lower pressure limitation than balanced
seals. A balanced seal design reduces the hydraulic forces acting on the seal faces
through mechanical seal design. As the seal faces rub together, the amount of heat
generated is determined by the amount of pressure applied, the lubricating film between
the faces, the rotational speed, and the seal ring materials. Balanced seals reduce the
seal ring area on which the stuffing box pressure acts. With a reduction in area, the
overall closing force is diminished. This results in better lubrication and reduced heat
generation and face wear compared to unbalanced seals. Unbalanced and balanced
seal designs are shown in Figure 3.9. The failure rate equation assumes a balanced
seal.

3.4.1 Mechanical Seal Failure Modes

     Failure modes of a mechanical seal can be identified by three main causes of
failure: temperature, pressure and velocity and a combination of these variables. For
example, fluid pressure can create extra heat at the seal face which in turn can increase
the rate of wear and other destructive failure modes such as material fracture and
distortion and leakage. Elastomer seals can become extruded and damaged. As the
pressure is increased, the probability of failure goes up.

     Some mechanical seals wear out with use and some fail prior to wearing out. The
seal face is the only part of a mechanical seal designed to wear out. Mechanical face
seals should last until the carbon face wears away. If the seal starts leaking before that
happens and the seal requires replacement, then the seal has failed. In some cases
the seal face has opened because it became jammed on the rotating component.
Another possibility is that one of the seal components such as the spring was damaged
by contact, heat or corrosion.

       Wear often occurs between the primary ring and mating ring. This surface contact
is maintained by a spring. There is a film of liquid maintained between the sealing
surfaces to eliminate as much friction as possible. For most mechanical seals the three
common points of sealing contact occur between the following points:

       (1) Mating surfaces between primary and mating rings

       (2) Between the rotating component and shaft or sleeve

Seals and Gaskets                    3-25  Revision G
(3) Between the stationary component and the gland plate

                   Figure 3.9 Balanced and Unbalanced Seal Designs

     Seal balance is a performance characteristic that measures how effective the seal
mating surfaces match. If not effectively matched, the seal load at the dynamic facing
may be too high causing the liquid film to be squeezed out and vaporized, thus causing
a high wear rate. The fluid pressure from one side of the primary ring causes a certain
amount of force to impinge on the dynamic seal face. The dynamic facing pressure can
be controlled by manipulating the hydraulic closing area with a shoulder on a sleeve or
by seal hardware. By increasing the area, the sealing force is increased.

Seals and Gaskets  3-26                                             Revision G
     The reliability of a mechanical seal depends to a very large extent on its ability to
maintain a thin film in the gap between the mating surfaces and at the same time
minimizing the mechanical contact of the face surfaces. Too much contact may cause
overheating of the face materials and insufficient contact may cause excessive leakage.
Over time common modes of seal failure are by fatigue-like surface embrittlement,
abrasive removal of material, and corrosion. Wear and sealing efficiency of fluid system
seals are related to the characteristics of the surrounding operating fluid. Abrasive
particles present in the fluid during operation will have a strong influence on the wear
resistance of seals, the wear rate of the seal increasing with the quantity of
environmental contamination. Contaminants from the environment such as sand can
enter the fluid system and become embedded in the elastomeric seals causing abrasive
cutting and damage to shafts as well as the mechanical seal.

     There should be special consideration for tradeoffs involved with each type of seal
material. For example, solid silicon carbide has excellent abrasion resistance, good
corrosion resistance, and moderate thermal shock resistance. This material has better
qualities than a carbon-graphite base material but has a PV value of 500,000 lb/in-min
while carbon-graphite has a 50,000 lb/in-min PV value. With all other values being the
same, the heat generated would be five times greater for solid silicon carbide than for
carbon-graphite materials. The required cooling flow to the solid silicon carbide seal
would be larger to maintain the film thickness on the dynamic seal faces. If this cooling
flow can't be maintained, then an increase in wear would occur due to higher surface
temperatures.

3.4.2 Failure Rate Model for Mechanical Seals

     An important seal design consideration is seal balance. Seal balance refers to the
difference between the pressure of the fluid being sealed and the contact pressure
between the seal faces. It is the ratio of hydraulic closing area to seal face area
(parameter k in Equation (3-13). A balanced seal is designed so that the effective
contact pressure is always less than the fluid pressure, reducing friction at the seal
faces. The result is less rubbing wear, less heat generated and higher fluid pressure
capability. In an unbalanced seal, fluid pressure is not relieved by the face geometry,
the seal faces withstand full system fluid pressure in addition to spring pressure and the
face contact pressure is greater than or equal to fluid pressure. The failure rate
equation assumes a balanced seal.

     Of greatest importance with mechanical seals is a properly designed seal face.
Proper mating surface materials must be matched so that excessive heat isn't
generated from the dynamic motion of the seal faces. Too much heat can cause
thermal distortions on the face of the seal and cause gaps which can increase the
leakage rate. It can also cause material changes that can significantly increase the seal
wear rate. Therefore, a careful review of the seal material should be made for each sur-
face of the dynamic seal face. Equation (3-12) (Reference 26) includes such

Seals and Gaskets  3-27                        Revision G
coefficients of friction and wear rate. Table 3-6 shows frictional values for various seal
face materials.

     An important factor in the design of mechanical seals is the pressure velocity (PV)
coefficient. The PV coefficient is defined as the product of the seal face or system
pressure and the fluid velocity. This factor is useful in estimating seal reliability when
compared with manufacturer's limits. If the PV limit is exceeded, a seal may wear at a
rate greater than desired. PV limits are included in manufacturer's specification sheets.

                   SE = SE,B i CQ i CF i C i CT i CN i CPV              (3-16)

Where:   SE = Failure rate of mechanical seal in failures/million hours

        SE,B = Base failure rate of mechanical seal, 22.8 failures/million hours

         CQ = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of allowable

                  leakage on the base failure rate (See Figure 3.11) and Section
                  3.2.3.2

         Cf = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of seal face

                  surface finish on the base failure rate (See Sections 3.3.3.1,
                  3.2.3.4 and Figure 3.17)

         C = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid viscosity

                  on the base failure rate (See Table 3-3 and Section 3.2.3.5)

         CT = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of seal face

                   temperature on the base failure rate (See Figure 3.16 and
                   Section 3.2.3.6)

         CN = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of contaminants

                  on the base failure rate (See Table 3-4 and Section 3.3.3.2)

        CPV = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the pressure-

                   velocity coefficient on the base failure rate (See Sections 3.3.2
                  and 3.3.3.3)

Seals and Gaskets  3-28                                     Revision G
Fluid Pressure Multiplying Factor, CP  12.0
                                       11.0
                                       10.0      1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000

                                        9.0                             Fluid Pressure, PS, lbs/in2
                                        8.0
                                        7.0
                                        6.0
                                        5.0
                                        4.0
                                        3.0
                                        2.0
                                        1.0
                                        0.0

                                              0

For PS  1500 lbs/in2, CP = 0.25

                                                           PS     2
                                                          3000  
For PS > 1500 lbs/in2,                           CP  =

Where PS = P1 ­ P2 (upstream ­ downstream pressure)

                                                 Figure 3.10 Fluid Pressure Multiplying Factor, CP

Seals and Gaskets                                         3-29                                      Revision G
Leakage.Multiplying Factor, CQ3.5
         3.0
         2.5
         2.0
         1.5
         1.0
         0.5
         0.0

            0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16

                                         Allowable Leakage, Qf, in3/min

For Leakage > 0.03 in3/min, CQ = 0.055/Qf

For Leakage  0.03 in3/min, CQ = 4.2 - (79 Qf)

                                Figure 3.11 Allowable Leakage Multiplying Factor, CQ

Seals and Gaskets               3-30  Revision G
Seal Dia.Multiplying Factor, CDL12.0
        10.0

         8.0
         6.0
         4.0
         2.0
         0.0

              0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0

                                      Inner Diameter of Seal, DSL, inches

           CDL = 1.1 DSL + 0.32
Where: DSL = Inner diameter of seal

                Figure 3.12 Seal Diameter Multiplying Factor, CDL

Seals and Gaskets                 3-31  Revision G
Seal Size Multiplying Factor, CDL  12.0

                                   10.0
                                    8.0

                                    6.0

                                    4.0
                                    2.0

                                    0.0
                                         0.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 12.0 14.0 16.0 18.0 20.0 22.0 24.0 26.0

                                                                     Ratio of Length to Width, L/w

CDL = 0.45                         L    + 0.32
                                    w 

Where: L = Total linear length of gasket

                                   w = Minimum width of gasket

                                   Figure 3.13 Gasket Size Multiplying Factor, CDL

Seals and Gaskets                               3-32                                Revision G
M/C Multiplying Factor, C H  100.0

                              10.0

                                1.0

                                0.1

                                0.0
                                    0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5

                                                        Meyer Hardness/Contact Pressure, M/C

CH                           =   M / C 4.3
                                 0.55 

Where: M = Meyer Hardness, lbs/in2

                                C = Contact Pressure, lbs/in2

                                Figure 3.14 Material Hardness/Contact Pressure, CH

Seals and Gaskets                           3-33               Revision G
                                        9.0

                                        8.0

Surface Finish Multiplying Factor, C F  7.0

                                        6.0

                                        5.0

                                        4.0

                                        3.0

                                        2.0

                                        1.0

                                        0.0     10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130
                                             0
                                                                      Surface Finish, f , in RMS

                                        For f  15 in, C f = 0.25

                                        For f > 15 in,  Cf  =  f 1.65
                                                               353

                                        Where: f = Surface Finish, in RMS

                                                Figure 3.15 Surface Finish Multiplying Factor, CF

                                                                         (for static seals)

Seals and Gaskets                                                      3-34                        Revision G
Temperature Multiplying Factor, CT  7.0
                                    6.0
                                    5.0
                                    4.0
                                    3.0
                                    2.0
                                    1.0
                                    0.0

                                        60 50 40 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 -40 -50

                                                                                TR - TO, oF

                                    CT  =   1
                                            2t

                                    Where:  t = (TR - TO ) for (TR ­ TO)  40 oF

                                                        18

                                    and: CT = 0.21 for (TR ­ TO) > 40 oF

                                    TR = Rated Temperature of Seal, oF (See Table 3-6)
                                    TO = Operating Temperature of Seal, oF

                                            Figure 3.16 Temperature Multiplying Factor, CT

Seals and Gaskets                               3-35                                        Revision G
                                        6.0

Surface Finish Multiplying Factor, C F  5.0

                                        4.0

                                        3.0

                                        2.0

                                        1.0

                                        0.0     10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                             0
                                                                      Surface Finish, f , in RMS

For f  10 in, Cf = 1.00

For f > 10 in,                                  Cf  =      1
                                                       2((10- f )/38)

Where: f = Surface Finish, in RMS

                                                Figure 3.17 Surface Finish Multiplying Factor, CF

                                                                      ( for dynamic seals)

Seals and Gaskets                                                      3-36                        Revision G
                Table 3-3. Fluid Viscosity/Temperature Multiplying Factor, C

                                                for Typical Fluids

                                                C

FLUID                                   Fluid Temperature, oF

                  -50   0       50      100     150          200     250     300         350

Air             554.0   503.4   462.9   430.1   402.6        379.4   359.5      ---         ---
Oxygen          504.6   457.8   420.6   390.2   365.9        343.6   325.3      ---         ---
Nitrogen        580.0   528.0   486.5   452.6   424.3        400.0   379.6      ---         ---
Carbon Dioxide          599.9   510.7   449.7   395.9        352.1              ---         ---
Water              ---          6.309   12.15   19.43        27.30      ---     ---         ---
SAE 10 Oil         ---     ---  0.060   0.250   0.750        1.690      ---     ---         ---
SAE 20 Oil         ---     ---  0.0314  0.167   0.492        1.183   2.650   2.861       5.204
SAE 30 Oil         ---     ---  0.0297  0.1129  0.3519       0.8511  2.213   2.861       4.309
SAE 40 Oil         ---     ---  0.0122  0.0534  0.2462       0.6718  1.768   2.221       3.387
SAE 50 Oil         ---     ---  0.0037  0.0326  0.1251       0.3986  1.325   1.657       2.654
SAE 90 Oil         ---     ---  0.0012  0.0189  0.0973       0.3322  0.8509  1.515       2.591
Diesel Fuel        ---     ---  2.089   3.847   6.228        9.169   0.7855  16.31          ---
MIL-H-83282     0.1617  0.7492  0.2137  0.6643  1.421        2.585   12.78   0.6114      0.7766
MIL-H-5606      0.0031  0.0432  0.2829  0.6228  1.108        1.783   4.063   3.628       4.880
                0.0188  0.0951                                       2.719

--- Data for these temperatures determined to be unreliable

C  = O          
                

 Where: o = 2 x 10-8 lbf-min/in2
          = Dynamic viscosity of fluid being used, lbf-min/in2

Seals and Gaskets                       3-37                                 Revision G
                   Table 3-4. Contaminant Multiplying Factor, CN

TYPICAL QUANTITIES OF                         PARTICLE    NUMBER PARTICLES
PARTICLES PRODUCED BY                         MATERIAL    UNDER 10 MICRON PER
HYDRAULIC COMPONENTS                                      HOUR PER RATED GPM
                                                  steel   (N10)
      Piston Pump                                 steel
      Gear Pump                                   steel           0.017
      Vane Pump                                   steel           0.019
      Cylinder                                    steel           0.006
      Sliding action valve                        rubber          0.008
      Hose                                                        0.0004
                                                                  0.0013

                   CN  =    CO   3  i  FR  i  N 10
                            C10  
                                 

Where:              Co = System filter size in microns
                   C10 = Standard system filter size = 10 micron

                    FR = Rated flow rate, GPM

                   N10 = Particle size factor

        Table 3-5. TR Values for Typical Seal Materials (Reference 27)

                          SEAL MATERIAL                   TR (OF)

                   Natural rubber                         160
                   Ethylene propylene                     250
                   Neoprene                               250
                   Nitrile                                250
                   Polyacrylate                           300
                   Fluorosilicon                          450
                   Fluorocarbon                           475
                   Silicon rubbers                        450
                   Butyl rubber                           250
                   Urethane                               210
                   Fluroelastomers                        500
                   Fluroplastics                          500
                   Leather                                200
                   Impregnated poromeric material         250

Seals and Gaskets                                   3-38           Revision G
Table 3-6. Coefficient of Friction for Various Seal Face Materials

                   SLIDING MATERIALS

ROTATING           STATIONARY                   COEFFICIENT OF
(seal head)        (mating ring)
                                                  FRICTION ()
Carbon-graphite    - Cast Iron
 (resin filled)    - Ceramic                      0.07
                   - Tungsten Carbide             0.07
                   - Silicon Carbide              0.07
                   - Silicon Carbide Converted    0.02

                      Carbon                      0.015

Silicon carbide    - Tungsten Carbide             0.02
                   - Silicon Carbide Converted
                                                  0.05
                      Carbon                      0.02
                   - Silicon Carbide              0.08
                   - Tungsten Carbide

                   Table 3-7. Typical Pressure Velocity (PV) Limits

              Face Materials                PV (lb/in2 ft/min)

Carbon vs hard faced stainless steel             543,000
           Carbon vs ceramic                     543,000
                                                 992,000
       Carbon vs leaded bronze                  1,142,000
          Carbon vs nickel iron                 2,570,000

     Carbon vs tungsten carbide

Seals and Gaskets                     3-39                           Revision G
3.5 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 3, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of seals
and gaskets.

5. Bauer, P., M. Glickmon, and F. Iwatsuki, "Analytical Techniques for the Design of
Seals for Use in Rocket Propulsion Systems," Volume 1, ITT Research Institute,
Technical Report AFRPL-TR-65-61 (May 1965).

18. Hauser, D.L. et al., "Hardness Tester for Polyur," NASA Tech Briefs, Vol. 11, No. 6,
p. 57 (1987).

22. Howell, Glen W. and Terry M. Weathers, Aerospace Fluid Component Designers'
Handbook, Volumes I and II, TRW Systems Group, Redondo Beach, CA prepared for
Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, Edwards, CA, Report AD 874 542 and Report
AD 874 543 (February 1970).

26. Krutzsch, W.C., Pump Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York (1968).

27. May, K.D., "Advanced Valve Technology," National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, NASA Report SP-5019 (February 1965).

83. Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 86th Edition, CRC Press, 2005

105. OREDA Offshore Reliability Data, 5th Edition Det Norske Veritas, N-1363 Hovik,
       Norway 2009 ISBN 978-82-14-04830-8

123. Centrifugal Pump & Mechanical Seal Manual, William J. McNally, 2009

124. Parker O-Ring Handbook, 2001 Edition, Catalog ORD 5700/US, Parker Hannifin
       Corporation

125. "Improving the Reliability of Mechanical Seals", Michael Huebner, Chemical
         Engineering Progress, November 2005

Seals and Gaskets  3-40  Revision G
                       4 CHAPTER

                                                         SPRINGS

4.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     4.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... 1
     4.2 FAILURE MODES.............................................................................................. 4

        4.2.1 Fatigue Stress ............................................................................................. 4
        4.2.2 Spring Relaxation ........................................................................................ 5
        4.2.3 Miscellaneous Failure Modes ...................................................................... 6
     4.3 FAILURE RATE CONSIDERATIONS ................................................................ 8
        4.3.1 Static Springs .............................................................................................. 8
        4.3.2 Cyclic Springs.............................................................................................. 8
        4.3.3 Modulus of Rigidity ...................................................................................... 8
        4.3.4 Modulus of Elasticity.................................................................................... 8
        4.3.5 Spring Index ................................................................................................ 8
        4.3.6 Spring Rate ................................................................................................. 8
        4.3.7 Shaped Springs........................................................................................... 9
        4.3.8 Number of Active Coils................................................................................ 9
        4.3.9 Tensile Strength .......................................................................................... 9
        4.3.10 Corrosive Environment.............................................................................. 9
        4.3.11 Manufacturing Processes.......................................................................... 9
        4.3.12 Other Reliability Considerations for Springs ............................................ 10
     4.4 FAILURE RATE MODELS ............................................................................... 10
        4.4.1 Compression Spring.................................................................................. 10
        4.4.2 Extension Spring ....................................................................................... 13
        4.4.3 Torsion Spring ........................................................................................... 13
        4.4.4 Curved Washer ......................................................................................... 16
        4.4.5 Wave Washer............................................................................................ 17
        4.4.6 Belleville Washer....................................................................................... 20
        4.4.7 Cantilever Spring....................................................................................... 22
        4.4.8 Beam Spring.............................................................................................. 23
     4.5 REFERENCES ................................................................................................ 41

4.1 INTRODUCTION

     Mechanical springs are used in machine designs to exert force, provide flexibility,
and to store or absorb energy. Springs are manufactured for many different

Springs           4-1  Revision E
applications such as compression, extension, torsion, power, and constant force.
Depending on the application, a spring may be in a static, cyclic or dynamic operating
mode. A spring is usually considered to be static if a change in deflection or load
occurs only a few times, such as less than 10,000 cycles during the expected life of the
spring. A static spring may remain loaded for very long periods of time. The failure
modes of interest for static springs include spring relaxation, set and creep.

     Cyclic springs are flexed repeatedly and can be expected to exhibit a higher failure
rate due to fatigue. Cyclic springs may be operated in a unidirectional mode or a
reversed stress mode. In one case, the stress is always applied in the same direction,
while in the other, stress is applied first in one direction then in the opposite direction.
Figure 4.1 shows the difference in deflection and stress between these two operating
modes. For the same maximum stress and deflection between a unidirectional and
reversed stress spring, the stress range for the reversed stress spring will be twice that
of the unidirectional spring and therefore a shorter fatigue life would be expected.

     Dynamic loading refers to those intermittent occurrences of a load surge such as a
shock absorber inducing higher than normal stresses on the spring. Dynamic loading of
a spring falls into three main categories: shock, resonance of the spring itself, and
resonance of the spring/mass system. Shock loading occurs when a load is applied
with sufficient speed such that the first coils of the spring take up more of the load than
would be calculated for a static or cyclic situation. This loading is due to the inertia of
the spring coils. Spring resonance occurs when the operating speed is the same as the
natural frequency of the spring or a harmonic of the natural frequency. Resonance can
cause greatly elevated stresses and possible coil clash resulting in premature failure.
Resonance of the spring/mass system occurs when the spring is required to carry a
mass attached to its moving end and the combined system is subject to resonance at a
much lower cycle rate than the spring alone. Failure modes for dynamic loading of a
spring include fracture of the spring material due to shock pulses and resonance
surging.

     Springs tend to be highly stressed because they are designed to fit into small
spaces with the least possible weight and lowest material cost. At the same time they
are required to deliver the required force over a long period of time. The reliability of a
spring is therefore related to its material strength, design characteristics, and the
operating environment.

     Most springs are made of steel and material strength of the spring is usually listed in
terms of tensile strength in relation to the expected spring stress. Corrosion protection
of the spring steel has a significant impact on reliability and therefore material
properties, the processes used in the manufacturing of the spring, operating
temperature, and corrosive media must all be known before any estimate of spring
reliability can be made. Spring reliability is also directly related to the surface quality
and the distribution, type and size of sub-surface impurities in the spring material.

Springs  4-2  Revision E
              Static Stress
         Unidirectional Stress

         Reversed Stress

Springs  Figure 4.1 Cyclic Modes of Spring Operation  Revision E
                                    4-3
     Common materials of construction for springs include spring steel, stainless steel,
nickel base alloy, and copper base alloy or bronze. Spring steel is any variety of steels
that are normally of the high-carbon or alloy type. High carbon spring steels are
probably the most commonly used material for springs except for those to be used in
high or low temperature environments or for shock or high impact loads.

4.2 FAILURE MODES

     Springs of all types are expected to operate over very long periods of time without
significant changes in dimension, displacement or spring rate, often under changing
loads. Considering these requirements, potential failure modes include yielding, fatigue,
corrosion fatigue, fretting fatigue, creep, thermal relaxation, buckling, and force-induced
elastic deformation. The operating life of a mechanical spring arrangement is
dependent upon the susceptibility of the materials to corrosion and stress levels (static,
cyclic or dynamic). The most common failure modes for springs are fracture due to
fatigue and excessive loss of load due to stress relaxation. By definition, objects that
are loaded under purely oscillatory loads (Mean = 0 in Figure 4.1) fail when their
stresses reach the material's fatigue limit Fatigue. Conversely, objects that are loaded
under purely static loads (Range = 0) fail when their stresses reach the materials yield
limit Yield. For springs that have a mixture of Mean and Alt stresses, the Soderberg
Criterion provides a way to calculate a failure limit. Mean stress is plotted on one axis
and alternating stress on the other. Figure 4.2 is a typical Soderberg plot.

                      Figure 4. 2 Soderberg plot

4.2.1 Fatigue Stress

     All springs have finite fatigue limits, the limit depending on fatigue stress and the
degree of fluctuating loads. The four most common fatigue stress conditions include

Springs               4-4                         Revision E
constant deflection, constant load, unidirectional stress and reversed stress. A spring
inside a valve assembly is an example of a constant deflection where the spring is
cycled through a specified deflection range. An example of a constant load spring is the
use of vibration springs under a dead weight where the load applied to the spring does
not change during operation but the deflection will. A unidirectional stress is one where
the stress is always applied in the same direction such as used in the return spring of an
actuator. A reversed stress is applied first in one direction then in the opposite direction
such as used in a regulator valve. The three stages to a fatigue failure include crack
initiation, crack propagation and finally fracture of the spring material.

     Surging (resonant frequency response) can occur in high-speed cyclic applications
if axial operating frequencies approach the axial natural frequency of the helical-coil
spring. If the material and geometry of the axially reciprocating spring are such that its
axial natural frequency is close to the operating frequency, a traveling displacement
wave front is propagated and reflected along the spring with about the same frequency
as the exciting force. This condition results in local compressions and rarefactions
producing high stresses and/or erratic forces locally, with consequent loss of control of
the spring-loaded object. Surging of a valve spring, for example may allow the valve to
open erratically when it should remain closed or vice versa.

     The S10 value for a spring is the number of cycles that 90% of the springs operating
at the published stress level can be expected to complete or exceed before exhibiting
the first evidence of fatigue. If an S10 value for the spring can be obtained, this value
can be used in conjunction with the environmental multiplying factors contained in this
Chapter. In order to have an average failure rate based on MTBF the S10 value should
be multiplied by 4.55 to obtain an average life. The procedure for estimating spring
failure rates contained herein is intended to be used in the absence of specific S10 data.

4.2.2 Spring Relaxation

     Springs of all types are expected to operate over long periods of time without
significant changes in dimension, displacement, or spring rates, often under fluctuating
loads. If a spring is deflected under full load and the stresses induced exceed the yield
strength of the material, the resulting permanent deformation may prevent the spring
from providing the required force or to deliver stored energy for subsequent operations.
Most springs are subject to some amount of relaxation during their life span even under
benign conditions. The amount of spring relaxation is a function of the spring material
and the amount of time the spring is exposed to the higher stresses and/or
temperatures.

         Static springs can be used in constant deflection or constant load applications. A
constant deflection spring is cycled through a specified deflection range, the loads on
the spring causing some set or relaxation which in turn lowers the applied stress. The
spring may relax with time and reduce the applied load. Elevated temperatures can

Springs  4-5  Revision E
cause thermal relaxation, excess changes in spring dimension or reduced load
supporting capability. Under constant load conditions, the load applied to the spring
does not change during operation. Constant load springs may set or creep, but the
applied stress is constant. The constant stress may result in fatigue lives shorter than
those found in constant deflection applications.

         In many applications, compression and extension springs are subjected to
elevated temperatures at high stresses which can result in relaxation or loss of load.
This condition is often referred to as "set". After the operating conditions are
determined, set can be predicted and allowances made in the spring design. When no
set is allowed in the application, the spring manufacturer may be able to preset the
spring at temperatures and stresses higher than those to be encountered in the
operating environment.

         A highly stressed spring will set the first several times it is pressed. Relaxation is
a function of a fairly high stress (but usually lower then that required to cause set) over
a period of time. Creep in the spring may lead to unacceptable dimensional changes
even under static loading (set). A spring held at a certain stress will actually relax more
in a given time than a spring cycled between that stress and a lower stress because it
spends more time at the higher stress. The amount of spring relaxation over a certain
period of time is estimated by first determining the operating temperature, the maximum
amount of stress the spring sees and how long the spring will be exposed to the
maximum stress and the elevated temperature over its lifetime.

4.2.3 Miscellaneous Failure Modes

     Most extension spring failures occur in the area of the spring end. Extension
springs are designed to become longer under load and their maximum length must be
controlled for long life. Their turns are normally touching in the unloaded position and
they have a hook, eye or some other means of attachment. For maximum reliability, the
spring wire must be smooth with a gradual flow into the end without tool marks, sharp
corners or other stress risers. The spring ends should be made as an integral part of
the coil winding operation and the bend radius should be at least one and one-half times
the wire diameter.

     The operating life of a mechanical spring arrangement is dependent upon the
susceptibility of the materials to corrosion and stress levels (static, cyclic or dynamic).
The most common failure modes for springs are fracture due to fatigue and excessive
loss of load due to stress relaxation. Other failure mechanisms and causes need to be
reviewed for a specific application to assure that all considerations of reliability are
included in the prediction. Typical failure rate considerations include: level of loading,
operating temperature, cycling rate and corrosive environment.

     Table 4-1 is a list of failure mechanisms and causes of spring failure.

Springs  4-6  Revision E
         Table 4-1. Failure Modes for a Mechanical Spring

TYPE OF SPRING/STRESS           FAILURE MODES              FAILURE CAUSES
           CONDITION
                            - Load loss               - Parameter change
- Static (constant          - Creep                   - Hydrogen embrittlement
deflection or constant      - Set
load)                       - Yielding                - Excessive mean stress
                                                       unidirectional operation
- Cyclic (10,000 cycles     - Fracture
or more during the life of  - Damaged spring end      - Material flaws
the spring)                 - Fatigue failure         - High temperature operation
                                                      - Imperfection on inside
                            - Buckling
                                                       diameter of the spring
                            - Surging                 - Hydrogen embrittlement
                                                      - Stress concentration due to
                             - Complex stress change
                            as a function of time      tooling marks and rough
                                                       finishes
- Dynamic (intermittent     - Fracture                - Sharp bends on spring ends
occurrences of a load       - Fatigue failure          (extension springs)
surge)                                                - Surface imperfections (high
                                                       cycle with no shot peening)
                                                      - Corrosive atmosphere
                                                      - Misalignment
                                                      - Excessive stress range of
                                                       reverse stress
                                                      - Cycling temperature
                                                      - Low frequency vibration
                                                      - High frequency vibration

                                                      - Maximum load ratio
                                                       exceeded

                                                      - Insufficient space for
                                                       operation

                                                      - Shock impulse
                                                      - Surface defects
                                                      - Excessive stress range of

                                                       reverse stress
                                                      - Resonance surging

Springs                                 4-7                Revision E
4.3 FAILURE RATE CONSIDERATIONS

     The following paragraphs describe the terms and parameters used in developing
failure rate equations for springs.

4.3.1 Static Springs

     Static springs can be used in constant deflection or constant load applications. A
constant deflection spring is cycled through a specified deflection range, the loads on
the spring causing some set or relaxation which in turn lowers the applied stress. The
spring may relax with time and reduce the applied load. Under constant load
conditions, the load applied to the spring does not change during operation. Constant
load springs may set or creep, but the applied stress is constant. The constant stress
may result in fatigue lives shorter than those found in constant deflection applications.

4.3.2 Cyclic Springs

     As shown in Figure 4.1 cyclic springs can be classified as being unidirectional or
reverse loaded. In one case, the stress is always applied in the same direction, while in
the other, stress is applied first in one direction then in the opposite direction. Figure
4.20 shows the relationship between the cycle rate of a spring and its effect on failure
rate.

4.3.3 Modulus of Rigidity

     The modulus of rigidity (GM) is a material property defining the resistance to
shearing stresses for the spring material, the ratio of shearing stress to shear strain.
Typical values of rigidity modulus are provided in Table 4-2. Modulus of Rigidity is
sometimes referred to as Modulus in Torsion.

4.3.4 Modulus of Elasticity

     The modulus of elasticity provides a measure of elasticity in tension for the spring
material. Typical values are provided in Table 4-2.

4.3.5 Spring Index

     Spring index (r) is the ratio of mean coil diameter to wire diameter. A spring with a
high index will tend to tangle or buckle.

4.3.6 Spring Rate

     Spring rate (R) is the change in load per unit of deflection, a measure of stiffness.
Spring rate is measured in pounds / inch, the amount of weight needed to compress the
spring one inch.

Springs  4-8  Revision E
4.3.7 Shaped Springs

     If the spring has a variable diameter such as occurs for conical, barrel and
hourglass springs, the spring can be divided analytically into smaller increments and the
failure rate calculated for each. The failure rate for the total spring is computed by
adding the rates for the increments.

4.3.8 Number of Active Coils

     For compression springs with closed ends, either ground or not ground, the number
of active coils is two less than the total number of coils. There is some activity in the
end coils, but during deflection, some active material comes in contact with the end coils
and becomes inactive. Therefore, the total number of coils minus two is a good
approximation for the number of active coils. For extension springs, all coils are active.

4.3.9 Tensile Strength

     The tensile strength provides a measure of spring material deformation or set as a
function of stress. Values of tensile strength are included in Table 4-3.

4.3.10 Corrosive Environment

     Corrosion will reduce the load-carrying capability of a spring and its life. The
precise effect of a corrosive environment on spring performance is difficult to predict.
The reliability of a spring in terms of fatigue life and load-carrying ability will be affected
by corrosion, the quantitative effect being very hard to predict. Springs are almost
always in contact with other metal parts. If a spring is to be subjected to a corrosive
environment, the use of inert materials provides the best defense against corrosion.
Protective coatings can also be applied. In special situations, shot peening can be used
to prevent stress corrosion and cathodic protection systems can be used to prevent
general corrosion. The spring material is normally more noble (chemically resistant to
corrosion) than the structural components in contact with it because the lesser noble
alloy will be attacked by the electrolyte. The effects of corrosion on spring reliability
must be based on experience data considering the extent of a corrosive environment.
For failure rate models in Section 4.4 if corrosive protection is known to be applied to
the spring during the manufacturing process, a multiplying factor, CR, of 1.0 is used in
conjunction with the base failure rate. Values of CR greater than 1.0 are used based on
the user's experience with the spring and the operating environment.

4.3.11 Manufacturing Processes

     The following effects of manufacturing processes need to be considered in
evaluating a design for reliability:

          ·  Sharp corners and similar stress risers should be minimized.
          ·
             The hardness of the spring material can be sensitive to plating and baking
Springs      operations. Previous experience with manufactured springs is the normal

             4-9  Revision E
                   assurance of quality control procedures. For failure rate models in
                   Section 4.4, a multiplying factor, CM, of 1.0 is used in conjunction with the
                   base failure rate for known acceptable quality control procedures;
                   otherwise a higher value for the multiplying factor is used based on
                   previous experience with the manufacturer.

4.3.12 Other Reliability Considerations for Springs

     The most common failure modes of springs include fracture due to fatigue and
excessive loss of load. A reliability analysis should include a review of the following
items to assure maximum possible life:

             · When a spring is loaded or unloaded, a surge wave may transmit
                  torsional stress to the point of restraint. The impact velocity should
                  be determined to assure that the maximum load rating of the spring
                  is not exceeded.

             · Operating temperature should be determined. Both high and low
                  temperature conditions may require consideration of specialized
                  materials.

             · Exposure to electrical fields may magnetize the spring material and
                  cause fatigue failure.

4.4 FAILURE RATE MODELS

4.4.1 Compression Spring
     The compression spring is the most commonly used spring in machine designs. An

example of a compression spring is shown in Figure 4.3.

         L1        Ground Surface

                   O.D.
                       I.D.
                                                    Dc
              Dw

         Figure 4.3 Typical Helical Compression Spring

Springs      4-10                                       Revision E
     The failure rate of a compression spring depends upon the stress on the spring and
the relaxation provided by the material. This relaxation (change in load per unit

deflection) is referred to as the spring rate, R, which can be defined as follows:

                               R = PL                         (4-1)
                                     L1 - L2
Where:
         R = Spring rate, lbs/in
         PL = Load, lbs
         L1 = Initial length of spring, in
         L2 = Final deflection of spring, in

     The spring rate can be determined experimentally by deflecting the spring to 20% of

available deflection and measuring the load (P1) and spring length (L1). Next, the
spring is deflected to 80% of available deflection measuring the load (P2) and spring
length (L2), being certain that no coils other than the closed ends are touching. The

spring rate is then calculated as follows:

         R = P2 - P1 = PL                                     (4-2)
              L1 - L2 L1 - L2

     Stress in the spring is also proportional to the load, PL according to the following
relationship:

         SG  =  8 PL DC  KW                                   (4-3)
                 DW 3

Where:   SG = Spring stress, lbs/in2
         KW = Spring concentration factor (See equation 4-4)
          Dc = Mean coil diameter, in
         DW = Wire Diameter, in

     The spring concentration factor, KW is a function of the Spring index (ratio of the coil
diameter to wire diameter).

Springs         4-11                          Revision E
                KW    = 4r - 1    +  0.615                                 (4-4)
                        4r - 4         r

Where:   r = Spring index = Dc / Dw

    PL in Equation (4-1) can be substituted into Equation (4-3) for a stress level

equation, and the spring failure rate can be determined from a ratio of stress level to the
material tensile strength according to the following empirically derived relationship
(Reference 14):

         SP  =  SP,B    SG  3  =  SP,  B    8 PL DC KW  3                  (4-5)
                        TS                    TS DW 3   
                                                        

Where:     SP = Failure rate of spring, failures/million hours
         SP,B = Base failure rate for spring, 23.8 failures/million hours

            TS = Material tensile strength, lbs/in2

     A generalized equation that adjusts the base failure rate of a compression spring
considering anticipated operating conditions can be established:

         SP = SP,B iCG iCDW iCDC iCN iCY iCL iCK iCCS iCR iCM              (4-6)

Where:     CG = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the material

                    rigidity modulus on the base failure rate (See Table 4-2)

         CDW = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the wire diameter

                    on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.10)

         CDC = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of coil diameter on

                    the base failure rate (See Figure 4.11)

           CN = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the number of

                    active coils on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.12)

           CY = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of material tensile
                   strength, Ts, on the base failure rate (See Table 4-3)

           CL = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring deflection

                    on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.13)

Springs                              4-12                      Revision E
         CK = Multiplying factor which includes the spring concentration factor

                  on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.14)

         CCS = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring cycle rate

                  on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.20)

         CR = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of a corrosive

                   environment on the base failure rate (See Section 4.3.10)

         CM = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the

                  manufacturing process on the base failure rate (See
                  Section 4.3.11)

     The parameters in the failure rate equation can be located on an engineering
drawing by knowledge of design standards or by actual measurements. Other
manufacturing, quality, and maintenance contributions to failure rate are included in the
base failure rate as determined from field performance data.

4.4.2 Extension Spring

     Helical extension springs store energy in spring tensioning devices and are used to
exert a pulling force. Most helical extension springs are coiled with initial tension, equal
to the minimum force required to separate adjacent coils. Extension springs require a
method of attachment to other parts of the assembly. For extension springs, all coils

are active and Na will be equal to the number of coils. Otherwise, the failure rate

equations for extension springs are similar to compression springs and the procedures
in Section 4.4.1 should be used.

4.4.3 Torsion Spring

     Helical torsion springs are used to apply a torque or store rotational energy, the
most common application, the clothes pin. Torsion springs are stressed in bending as
shown in Figure 4.4. A torsion spring should always be loaded in a direction that
causes its body diameter to decrease because of increased stresses when the spring is
loaded in a direction which increases body diameter.

The mean diameter of a helical torsion spring is equal to:

         DI  =  ID  +  OD                                               (4-7)
                    2

The spring diameter will change with deflection according to the following equation:

         DC  =  DI  Na                                                  (4-8)
                Na  +

Springs                 4-13                                Revision E
Where:   DC = Mean diameter after deflection
         DI = Initial mean diameter, in.
           = Angular deflection from free position, revolutions
         Na = Number of active coils

                  Dw

                                                      

DI
              O.D.
         I.D.

         Body length, L2

               Figure 4.4 Typical Helical Torsion Spring

     Most torsion springs are close-wound, with body length equal to wire diameter
multiplied by the number of turns plus one. When the spring is deflected in a direction

which reduces its coil diameter, body length increases to L2 according to the following

equation:

         L2 = DW ( Na + 1 +  )                                               (4-9)

Where: DW = Wire diameter, in

     Stress in torsion springs is due to bending and for round wire is calculated with the
following equation:

         S = 3 EM DW                                                         (4-10)
               DI Na

Where:    S = Bending stress, lbs/in2                            Revision E
         EM = Modulus of Elasticity, lbs/in2
Springs
                                            4-14
         DW = Wire diameter, in
           = Angular deflection, revolutions
         DI = Mean diameter of spring, in
         Na = Number of active coils (See Section 4.3.8)

     The equation to determine the failure rate of a torsion spring can be written as
follows:

         SP = SP,B  S    3  i CCS  i  CR  i CM                                  (4-11)
                         
                     TS  

     From this equation a generalized equation can be developed containing a base
failure rate with applicable multiplying factors:

         SP = SP,B i CE i CDW i CN i CY i CL i CCS i CDC i CR i CM              (4-12)

Where: SP = Failure rate of torsion spring, failures/million hours

          SP,B = Base failure rate for torsion spring, 14.3 failures/million hours

             CE = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the material

                          elasticity modulus on the base failure rate (See Table 4-2)

            CDW = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the wire diameter

                          on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.10)

              CN = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the number of

                          active coils on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.12)

              CY = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of material tensile

                          strength on the base failure rate (See Table 4-3)

              CL = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring deflection

                          on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.13)

             CCS = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring cycle rate

                          on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.20)

            CDC = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of coil diameter on

                          the base failure rate (See Figure 4.21)

              CR = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of a corrosive

Springs                     4-15                                    Revision E
                               environment on the base failure rate (See Section 4.3.10)

                  CM = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the

                               manufacturing process on the base failure rate (See Section
                               4.3.11)

4.4.4 Curved Washer

     Curved washers are used to secure fasteners, distribute loads, absorb vibrations
and axial end play, and other similar applications. A typical curved washer is shown in
Figure 4.5. A special type of curved washer, the Belleville washer, is discussed in
Section 4.4.6. When a load is applied to a curved washer it tends to flatten causing
radial and circumferential strains. This elastic deformation constitutes the spring action.
Stress is not distributed uniformly in curved washers, the greatest stress occurring at
the convex inner edge. Curved washers exert a relatively light thrust load. Bearing
surfaces should be hard to prevent washer corners from scoring the shaft.

                                                                                                                                       t

                                   I.D.
                                               O.D.

                                                     f

         Figure 4.5 Typical Curved Washer

The stress on a curved washer is:

         S  =  6 EM f t                                           (4-13)

               ( OD )2                                  Revision E

Where:     S = Bending stress, lb/in2
         EM = Modulus of Elasticity, lb/in2
Springs
            f = Washer deflection, in
           t = Washer thickness, in
         OD = Outside Diameter, in

                                              4-16
The failure rate of a curved washer is determined using the following equation:

         SP = SP,B  S     3  i  CCS  i  CR  i CM              (4-11) ref
                          
                      TS  

     A generalized equation that adjusts the base failure rate of a curved washer
considering anticipated operating conditions can be established:

         SP = SP,B i CE i Ct i CD i CY i C f i CCS i CR i CM              (4-14)

Where:     SP = Failure rate of curved washer, failures/million hours

         SP,B = Base failure rate for curved washer, 1.1 failures/million hours

           CE = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the material

                      elasticity modulus on the base failure rate (See Table 4-2)

           Ct = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the material

                      thickness on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.16)

           CD = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of washer diameter

                      on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.17)

           CY = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of material tensile

                      strength on the base failure rate (See Table 4-3)

           Cf = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of washer deflection

                      on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.18)

          CCS = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring cycle rate

                      on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.20)

           CR = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of a corrosive

                      environment on the base failure rate (See Section 4.3.10)

          CM = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the

                      manufacturing process on the base failure rate (See
                      Section 4.3.11)

4.4.5 Wave Washer

     Wave washers are used to apply moderate thrust loads when radial space is
limited. A typical wave washer is shown in Figure 4.6.

Springs                              4-17                     Revision E
                                                                t

                    I.D.
                              O.D.

               f = h1 - h2                      h1

                                                h2

                                Figure 4.6 Typical Wave Washer
The stress on a wave washer is given by:

               0.3  EM   f  t  N    2
                     D2
         S  =                                                                  (4-15)

Where:     S = Bending stress, lbs/in2
          EM = Modulus of Elasticity, lbs/in2

            f = Deflection, in
           t = Material thickness, in
           N = Number of waves
           D = Mean diameter, in = (OD + ID)/2
         OD = Outside Diameter, in
          ID = Inside Diameter, in

The failure rate of a wave washer is determined using the following equation:

Springs             4-18                                           Revision E
                 SP = SP,B  S    3  i  CCS  i CR  i CM                   (4-11) ref
                                 
                             TS  

     A generalized equation that adjusts the base failure rate of a wave washer
considering anticipated operating conditions can be established:

         SP = SP,B i CE i Ct i CD i CY i C f i CNW i CCS i CR i CM              (4-16)

Where:    SP =   Failure rate of wave washer, failures/million hours
         SP,B =
                 Base failure rate for wave washer, 1.9 failures/million hours
           CE =
                 Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the material
                 elasticity modulus on the base failure rate (See Table 4-2)

         Ct = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the material

                  thickness on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.16)

         CD = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of washer

                   diameter on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.17)

         CY = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of material

                   tensile strength on the base failure rate (See Table 4-3)

         Cf = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of washer

                  deflection on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.18)

         CNW = Multiplying Factor which considers the number of waves

                     on the base failure rate (See Table 4-4)

         CCS = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of cycle rate

                    on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.20)

         CR = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of a corrosive

                   environment on the base failure rate (See Section 4.3.10)

         CM = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the

                  manufacturing process on the base failure rate

                  (See Section 4.3.11)

Springs                             4-19                            Revision E
4.4.6 Belleville Washer

     When a load is applied to a Belleville washer it tends to flatten causing radial and
circumferential strains. This elastic deformation creates the spring action. A typical
Belleville washer is shown in Figure 4.7.

               I.D.                                   h
                         O.D.                     t

         Figure 4.7 Typical Belleville Washer

     Belleville washers are capable of providing very high loads at small deflections.
Stress is not distributed uniformly in Belleville washers. The highest stress occurs at
the top inner edge and can be estimated with the following equation:

         S  =  EM  fR  ·         t                                   (4-17)
               1-  2             a2  

Where:    S = Bending stress, lbs/in2
         EM = Modulus of Elasticity, lbs/in2
          f = Deflection, in

           = Poisson's Ratio
          R = Dimension factor (See Figure 4.17)

            t = Material thickness, in
           a = O.D./2, in

Springs            4-20                                  Revision E
The failure rate of a Belleville washer is determined using the following equation:

         SP  = SP,B  S    3  i  CCS  i  CR  i  CM                        (4-11) ref
                          
                      TS  

     A generalized equation that adjusts the base failure rate of a belleville washer
considering anticipated operating conditions can be established:

         SP = SP,B i CE i Ct i CD i C f i CY i CS i CCS i CR i CM               (4-18)

Where:    SP = Failure rate of Belleville washer, failures/million hours

         SP,B = Base failure rate for Belleville washer, 2.6 failures/million hours

           CE = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the material

                      elasticity modulus on the base failure rate (See Table 4-2)

         Ct = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of material

                   thickness on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.16)

         CD = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of washer size

                   on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.17)

         Cf = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of washer deflection

                   under load on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.18)

         CY = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of material

                   tensile strength on the base failure rate (See Table 4-3)

         CS = Multiplying factor for compressive stress (See Figure 4.19)

         CCS = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring cycle

                    rate on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.20)

         CR = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of a corrosive

                   environment on the base failure rate (See Section 4.3.10)

         CM = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the

                  manufacturing process on the base failure rate

                  (See Section 4.3.11)

Springs              4-21                                           Revision E
4.4.7 Cantilever Spring
     Cantilever springs are fabricated from flat strip material which stores and releases

energy upon being deflected by an external load. A typical cantilever spring is shown in
Figure 4.8. In complex designs, only a small part of the device may be functioning as a
spring, and for analytical purposes, that portion which is active during operation may be
considered as an independent device.

                                                                                                   L

                                                                                                                                                f

         Figure 4.8 Typical Cantilever Spring

The bending stress for cantilever springs can be determined as follows:

         S  =  3  EM f  t                                                (4-19)
                  2 L2

Where:     S = Bending stress, lbs/in2
         EM = Modulus of elasticity, lbs/in2
          f = deflection, in
          t = thickness, in
          L = length, in

The failure rate of a cantilever spring is determined using the following equation:

Springs           4-22                         Revision E
         SP = SP,B  S     3  i  CCS  i  CR  i CM                         (4-11) ref
                          
                      TS  

     A generalized equation that adjusts the base failure rate of a cantilever spring
considering anticipated operating conditions can be established:

         SP = SP,B i CE i Ct i CL i C f i CY i CCS i CR i CM                  (4-20)

Where:    SP = Failure rate of cantilever spring, failures/million hours

         SP,B = Base failure rate for cantilever spring, 1.1 failures/million hours

           CE = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the material

                      elasticity modulus on the base failure rate (See Table 4-2)

         Ct = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of material

                   thickness on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.16)

         CL = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring length

                   on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.22)

         Cf = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring deflection

                   on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.18)

         CY = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of material

                   tensile strength on the base failure rate (See Table 4-3)

         CCS = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring cycle

                    rate on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.20)

         CR = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of a corrosive

                   environment on the base failure rate (See Section 4.3.10)

         CM = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the

                   manufacturing process on the base failure rate (See

                   Section 4.3.11)

4.4.8 Beam Spring

     Beam springs are usually rectangular in shape and formed into an arc as shown in
Figure 4.9. Assuming the ends are free to laterally expand, stress can be computed as
follows:

Springs                      4-23                             Revision E
                S     =  6   EM   f  t                                         (4-21)
                              L2

Where:     S = Bending stress, lbs/in2
         EM = Modulus of elasticity, lb/in2

           f = Spring deflection, in

          t = Material thickness, in

           L = Active spring length, in

                             P ft

                               L

                Figure 4.9 Typical Beam Spring

The failure rate of a beam spring is determined using the following equation:

         SP  =  SP,B     S   3    i  CCS  i  CR  i  CM  (4-11) ref
                         TS  
                             

     A generalized equation that adjusts the base failure rate of a beam spring
considering anticipated operating conditions can be established:

Springs                           4-24                  Revision E
         SP = SP,B i CE i Ct i CL i C f i CY i CCS i CR i CM              (4-22)

Where: SP = Failure rate of beam spring, failures/million hours

          SP,B = Base failure rate for beam spring, 4.4 failures/million hours

             CE = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the material

                          elasticity modulus on the base failure rate (See Table 4-2)

              Ct = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of material

                          thickness on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.16)

             CL = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring length

                          on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.22)

             Cf = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring deflection

                          on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.18)

             CY = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of material tensile

                          strength on the base failure rate (See Table 4-3)

             CCS = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spring cycle rate

                          on the base failure rate (See Figure 4.20

             CR = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of a corrosive

                          environment on the base failure rate (See Section 4.3.10)

             CM = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the

                          manufacturing process on the base failure rate (See
                          Section 4.3.11)

Springs  4-25                                                 Revision E
                                       10.000

Wire Diameter Multiplying Factor, CDW  1.000

                                       0.100

                                       0.010

                                       0.001
                                              0.01 0.03 0.05 0.07 0.09 0.11 0.13 0.15 0.17
                                                                              Wire Diameter, DW, inches

                                               CDW  =     DW    3
                                                         0.085  

                                                    Figure 4.10 Multiplying Factor for Wire Diameter

Springs                                                            4-26                               Revision E
                                        10.0000

Coil Diameter Multiplying Factor, C DC  1.0000

                                        0.1000

                                        0.0100

                                        0.0010
                                                0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00 1.20 1.40 1.60 1.80 2.00 2.20 2.40 2.60 2.80 3.00

                                                                               Coil Diameter, DC, inches

                                        CDC      =    0.58  6
                                                       DC   
                                                            

                                                 Figure 4.11 Multiplying Factor for Spring Coil Diameter

Springs                                                        4-27  Revision E
                                      100.0

Number Coils Multiplying Factor, C N  10.0

                                      1.0

                                      0.1
                                           4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
                                                                           Number of Active Coils, N a

                                             CN  =    14  3
                                                      Na  
                                                          

                                      Figure 4.12 Multiplying Factor for Number of Active Coils in a Spring

Springs                                                      4-28  Revision E
                                           1000.0

Spring Deflection Multiplying Factor, C L  100.0

                                           10.0

                                           1.0

                                           0.1

                                           0.0

                                                   0.0    1.0         2.0  3.0   4.0                         5.0  6.0

                                                                      Spring Deflection, L 1 - L 2 , inches

                                           CL      =      L1 - L2  3
                                                           1.07    

                                                        Figure 4.13 Multiplying Factor for Spring Deflection

Springs                                                                    4-29                                   Revision E
                                              1.6

                                              1.5

Stress Concentration Multiplying Factor, C K  1.4

                                              1.3

                                              1.2

                                              1.1

                                              1.0

                                              0.9

                                              0.8

                                              0.7

                                              0.6

                                                   3.0         5.0  7.0          9.0    11.0      13.0   15.0         17.0

                                                                                 Spring Index, r

                                              CK   =     KW    3
                                                        1.219  

Where:                                                         KW   = 4r - 1  +  0.616  and r = DC
                                                                      4r - 4       r                 DW

                                                        DC = Coil Diameter, inches
                                                        DW = Wire Diameter, inches

                                                      Figure 4.14 Multiplying Factor for Stress Concentration Factor

Springs                                                                          4-30                    Revision E
                                           10.000

Spring Deflection Multiplying Factor, C L  1.000

                                           0.100

                                           0.010

                                           0.001
                                                 0.05 0.20 0.35 0.50 0.65 0.80 0.95 1.10 1.25 1.40

                                                                            Spring Deflection,  , revolutions

CL                                         =           3
                                                0.667  

                                           Where:  = Angular rotation, revolutions

                                                Figure 4.15 Multiplying Factor for Deflection of a Torsion Spring

Springs                                                   4-31                      Revision E
                                          100.0

Washer Thickness Multiplying Factor, C t  10.0

                                              1.0

                                              0.1

                                              0.0      0.015  0.025 0.035 0.045 0.055 0.065            0.075       0.085
                                                0.005                  Material Thickness, t , inches

                                          Ct  =      t 3
                                                   0.025 

                                                       Figure 4.16 Multiplying Factor for Material Thickness

Springs                                                       4-32                                     Revision E
                                     100.0

Washer Size Multiplying Factor, C D  10.0

                                         1.0

                                         0.1

                                         0.0

                                         0.0
                                             0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5

                                                                            Washer Diameter OD, inches

                                     CD  =    1.20  6
                                              OD    

Where:                                        OD = Outside Diameter of Belleville, Curved or Wave
                                                        Washer, inches

                                                    Figure 4.17 Multiplying Factor for Washer Size

Springs                                                4-33                                         Revision E
                                           100.00

Washer Deflection Multiplying Factor, C f  10.00

                                           1.00

                                           0.10

                                           0.01

                                           0.01             0.03      0.05  0.07  0.09               0.11  0.13        0.15

                                                                      Washer Deflection, f , inches

                                                   Cf  =       f   3
                                                            0.055  

                                           Figure 4.18 Multiplying Factor for Washer or Spring Deflection

Springs                                                                     4-34                           Revision E
Washer Stress Multiplying Factor, C S  3.5
                                       3.0
                                       2.5
                                       2.0
                                       1.5
                                       1.0
                                       0.5
                                       0.0

                                           1.1 1.5 1.9 2.3 2.7 3.1 3.5 3.9 4.3 4.7 5.1
                                                                    Bellville Washer Dimension Factor, R

                                       CS  =      6 3        R-1   -  1    R  -  1      (  R  - 1)2  
                                                             ln R             2                      
                                                  ln  R                                       R2

Where: R = outside diameter
                inside diameter

                                       Figure 4.19 Multiplying Factor for Belleville Washer Compressive Stress

Springs                                                                             4-35               Revision E
                                    5.0

                                    4.0

Cycle Rate Multiplying Factor, CCS  3.0

                                    2.0

                                    1.0

                                    0.0      40.0 80.0 120.0 160.0 200.0 240.0 280.0 320.0 360.0 400.0 440.0 480.0
                                        0.0                           Spring Cycle Rate, CR, Cycles/Minute

                                    For CR  30 cycles/min, CCS = 0.100

                                    For 30 cycles/min < CR   300 cycles min,    CCS  =  CR
                                                                                        300

                                    For CR > 300 cycles/min,  CCS  =    CR   3
                                                                        300  

                                    Where: CR = Spring cycle rate, cycles/min

                                             Figure 4.20 Multiplying Factor for Spring Cycle Rate

Springs                                                                 4-36                 Revision E
                                        10.0000

Coil Diameter Multiplying Factor, C DC  1.0000

                                        0.1000

                                        0.0100

                                        0.0010
                                                0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00 1.20 1.40 1.60 1.80 2.00 2.20 2.40 2.60 2.80 3.00

                                                                               Coil Diameter, D C , inches

CDC  =                                    0.58   3
                                           DC    
                                                 

Where Dc = Coil diameter, inches

                                          Figure 4.21 Multiplying Factor for Spring Coil Diameter
                                                          (Torsion Springs)

Springs                                             4-37  Revision E
    Spring Length Multiplying Factor, CL  100.0

                                           10.0

                                             1.0

                                             0.1

                                             0.0

                                             0.0
                                                 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5
                                                                                   Spring Length, L , inches

CL  =                                       1.20  6
                                             L    

                                                     Figure 4.22 Multiplying Factor for Spring Length

Springs                                              4-38                                              Revision E
       Table 4-2. Moduli of Rigidity and Elasticity for Typical Spring Materials

                           MODULUS OF                    MODULUS OF
                           RIGIDITY (GM)
MATERIAL                   lbs/in2 x 106         CG      ELASTICITY (EM)  CE
                                                         lbs/in2 x 106
                                                                          1.05
Ferrous:                   11.8                  1.08            29.0     1.00
 Music Wire                11.5                  1.00            28.5     1.05
 Hard Drawn Steel          11.2                  0.92            29.0     1.05
 Chrome Steel              10.8                  0.83            29.0     0.98
 Silicon-Manganese         10.0                  0.67            28.0     1.04
 Stainless, 302, 304, 316  10.5                  0.76            29.5     1.05
 Stainless 17-7 PH         11.0                  0.88            29.0     1.11
 Stainless 420             11.4                  0.97            29.5
 Stainless 431                                                            0.15
                                                                          0.15
Non-Ferrous:                                                              0.21
                                                                          1.09
Spring Brass               5.0                   0.08            15.0     0.76
                                                 0.14            15.0
Phosphor Bronze            6.0                   0.23            17.0
                                                 0.76            31.0
Beryllium Copper           7.0                   0.56            26.0

Inconel                    10.5

Monel                      9.5

     NOTE: Modulus GM is used for compression and extension springs; modulus EM is
used for torsion springs, flat springs and spring washers.

CG     =       GM      3         CE       =         EM   106  3
            11.5 x106                            28.5 x       
                                                              

where: GM = Modulus of Rigidity (lbs/in2)
           EM = Modulus of Elasticity (lbs/in2)

Springs                                   4-39                         Revision E
           Table 4-3. Material Tensile Strength Multiplying Factor, CY

         MATERIAL                   TENSILE STRENGTH, TS                     CY
                                    lbs/in2 x 103
Brass                                                                     5.15
Phosphor Bronze                             110                           3.51
Monel 400                                   125                           2.25
Inconel 600                                 145                           1.74
Monel K500                                  158                           1.28
Copper-Beryllium                            175                           1.00
17-7 PH, RH 950                             190                           0.74
Hard Drawn Steel                            210                           0.68
Stainless Steel 302, 18-8                   216                           0.59
Spring Temper Steel                         227                           0.47
Chrome Silicon                              245                           0.36
Music Wire                                  268                           0.27
                                           295

     NOTE: These are typical values based on a wire diameter of 0.1 inch. Actual
values of tensile strength will vary with wire diameter.

           190 x   10  3  3
               TS         
CY  =                               where TS = Tensile Strength, lbs/in2

                   Table 4-4. Wave Washer Multiplying Factor, CNW

                             NUMBER OF WAVES        CNW

                                           3     2.78
                                           4     1.56
                                           5     1.00
                                           6     0.69
                                           7     0.51
                                           8     0.39

                          CNW  =     5  2
                                    NW  

Springs                                    4-40                           Revision E
4.5 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 4, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of
mechanical springs.

12. Carson, Harold, "Springs: Troubleshooting and Failure Analysis", Marcel Dekker,
      Inc. New York. (1983)

14. "Engineering Guide to Spring Design" Associated Spring, Barnes Group Inc., Form
      No. 515 (1981).

19. Hindhede, U., et al, Machine Design Fundamentals, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1983

35. "Optimum Design of Helical Springs", Machine Design, (6 November 1980).

58. Parmley, R.O., Mechanical Components Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY
       1985

82. Metals Handbook, American Society for Metals, 1985, ISBN 0-87170-188-X

115. Partab Jeswani and John Bleda, "A Predictive Process for Spring Failure Rates
       in Automotive Parts Application", General Motors Corporation, SAE Technical
       Paper 910356, February 1991

135. Handbook of Spring Design, Spring Manufacturers Institute, Inc. 2002

Springs  4-41  Revision E
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Springs  4-42                                Revision E
                                5 CHAPTER

                       SOLENOIDS, CONTACTORS

5.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     5.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... 1
     5.2 FAILURE MODES.............................................................................................. 3
     5.3 FAILURE RATE OF SOLENOID ASSEMBLY ................................................... 5

        5.3.1 Temperature Multiplying Factor................................................................... 6
        5.3.2 Application Service Factor........................................................................... 7
     5.4 FAILURE RATE OF CONTACTOR ASSEMBLY ............................................... 8
     5.5 REFERENCES ................................................................................................ 16

5.1 INTRODUCTION

     This chapter includes the procedures for estimating the reliability of solenoids and
contactors in their intended operating environments. Solenoids are used to control the
motion of other mechanical components such as valves and actuators. The most
accurate method for predicting the failure rate of these assemblies is to sum the failure
rates for the individual parts that make up the assembly. Procedures for estimating the
failure rate of valves and actuators and the parts comprising these assemblies such as
springs and bearings are contained in various chapters of the Handbook. In the event
the solenoid is part of a relay, Section 5.4 of this chapter contains the procedures for
estimating the failure rate of the contactor assembly.

     Solenoids are electromechanical devices that convert electrical energy into
mechanical motion. Generally this motion is used to move a load a specified distance
or rotational angle within a specified time. Linear magnetic solenoids usually produce
motion by pulling a plunger into the coil when energized. They can also be equipped
with a push rod mounted to one end of the plunger providing a pushing motion when
energized. The plunger of the solenoid assembly, also known as the armature, is made
of ferrous material to increase magnetism or permeability. Rotary solenoids convert
axial motion into a rotary stroke.

     Component parts of a solenoid include a coil to carry current and generate ampere
turns, an iron shell to provide a magnetic circuit and a movable plunger to act as the
working element. Component parts of example linear and rotary solenoids are shown in
Figure 5.1. Electrical current is supplied to the solenoid coil that is wound tightly

Solenoids, Contactors  5-1  Revision E
enough to limit the current drain and sized large enough to provide for adequate heat
dissipation. The resulting magnetic field draws the plunger from its unpowered,
extended position to a seated position against a backstop or pole piece. Because the
linear force on the plunger is nonlinear with position, the force is relatively high
immediately adjacent to the seated position and declines rapidly with increased distance
from the seated position. Return motion of the solenoid upon deenergizing the coil is
provided by the load itself or a return spring. Rotary solenoids normally consist of a
plunger and small ball bearings that ride on an inclined plane.

                                                                                        Linear Solenoid

                            Rotary Solenoid

                       Figure 5.1 Component Parts of a Solenoid

     The stroke in linear solenoids or rotation in rotary solenoids is the total plunger
travel or rotary shaft motion when electrical power is applied to the solenoid. The force
in linear solenoids or torque in rotary solenoids is the load that the solenoid is capable

Solenoids, Contactors  5-2                                       Revision E
of pulling, pushing, holding or rotating at the start of a specified motion. This load
capability will depend on applied voltage, ambient temperature and the solenoid
operating duty cycle. The solenoid force or torque will decrease as the solenoid coil
temperature increases depending on coil wire resistance. Continuous duty solenoids
are considerably larger than intermittent duty devices and provide more pull-and-hold
strength. Solenoids that are capable of both intermittent and continuous duty will exhibit
force ratings that vary widely with duty cycle.

     The solenoid may be used to control the motion of various components such as a
valve or contactor. Clearance between the coil assembly and the armature assembly
must be maintained for proper operation and the design should be evaluated for
reliability considering the operating environment. For small solenoids, the armature has
minimal effect on the part failure rate. For large solenoid operated assemblies, the
procedures in Chapter 20 can be used to evaluate the wear rate of the solenoid plunger.
And, if the solenoid is used to control an actuator, the procedures of Chapter 9 can be
used to determine the failure rate of the actuator. Chapter 6 contains procedures for
evaluating a valve if the solenoid is part of a valve assembly. If a return spring is being
used in the solenoid, the procedures in Chapter 4 can be used to determine the
reliability of the spring in its operating environment. Chapter 7 contains procedures for
evaluating the rotating bearing if a rotary solenoid is being evaluated. Section 5.4
contains the procedures for evaluating the contactor if the solenoid is part of a relay or
contactor configuration.

     The reliability of a typical solenoid assembly depends on the construction of the coil
assembly, length of the stroke, and the environment in which it operates. The failure
rate of the solenoid assembly is dependent upon manufacturing quality associated with
the assembly of the coil in relation to the armature as well as upon operating
environment including shock, vibration and corrosive environment. The failure rate of
the solenoid assembly can be determined using the procedures in Section 5.3. The
maximum specified cycling rate of the solenoid should be determined and compared
with the potential operating rate to make sure the coil will not be overheated in its
operating environment. When a solenoid is energized by the voltage source, heat is
generated which increases the temperature of the coil. This temperature rise may have
some undesired effects, since resistance of the coil winding increases with temperature,
which in turn, reduces electrical current. This reduction in current reduces the force
output. An extreme increase in temperature can result in damage to the winding.
Usually the limiting factor for operating temperature is the rated temperature of the
solenoid insulating material (see Section 5.3.1).

5.2 FAILURE MODES

     The primary failure modes of a solenoid inductor (coil) assembly include one or
more winding shorts or an open coil usually caused by overheating. Heat in a solenoid
is a function of power and the time during which voltage is applied. Heat can be

Solenoids, Contactors  5-3  Revision E
controlled by providing air flow, by mounting the solenoid on a surface (heat sink) large
enough to dissipate the heat, or introduction of alternate cooling methods. Table 5-1
provides some typical failure modes of the solenoid assembly and if applicable, a
contactor. Solenoids are enclosed within a steel housing to form part of the magnetic
circuit and to provide structural integrity. It is important to review the mounting of the
solenoid assembly to assure an adequate heat sink for high temperature operations.
Usually a mounting surface area of ten times the area of the solenoid should be
maintained.

                 Table 5-1. Typical Failure Modes of a Solenoid and Contactor

FAILURE MODE           FAILURE MECHANISM              FAILURE CAUSE

                                                      Mechanical jamming of
                                                      plunger

Coil burnout           Inrush current causes coil Insufficient heat sink area
                       overheating and burnout for solenoid

                                                      Supply voltage interruption
                                                      resulting in inductive surge

                       Heat builds up faster than it  Excessive cycling rate
                       can be dissipated

Failure to operate     Increase in coil resistance Excessive ambient
                       preventing solenoid closure temperature

                       Shorted coil at lead wires Excessive moisture

Open inductor          Open lead at termination       Coil voltage overload,
winding                                               vibration

Armature (plunger) Mismatch of solenoid force         Excessive plunger force
                                                      creating hammering
failure                and load
                                                      Jammed return spring
Poor response time Insufficient solenoid force
                                                      Damaged / jammed spring
(pull-in time)         with respect to load           or loss of load force

Poor release time      Insufficient load or spring
(drop-out time)        force to release plunger

Damaged contactor Contactor arcing                    Excessive load voltage

Solenoids, Contactors            5-4                  Revision E
     Solenoids have a maximum ON time for a given duty cycle, wattage and power
input so it is important to consider the duty cycle and wattage when the solenoid is
pulsed repeatedly. If the ON time of the solenoid is more than 5 minutes during a single
pulse, it should be considered a continuous duty (100% duty cycle) solenoid. It is
important that the solenoid reaches a sufficient cool-down time before being
reenergized.

5.3 FAILURE RATE OF SOLENOID ASSEMBLY

     The failure rate of the solenoid can be estimated from the following equation:

                       SO = SO,B i CT i CK i CS                              (5-1)

Where:   SO = Failure rate of a solenoid in failures/million hours
        SO,B = Base failure rate of solenoid, 2.77 failures/million operations

          CT = Temperature multiplying factor, See Section 5.3.1 and Figure 5.2
          CK = Application service factor, See Section 5.3.2 and Table 5-2
           CS = Use rate (operations/min x 60 min/hour)

     Since an inductor consists of a number of turns of wire it will have some small
amount of direct current resistance. This copper loss of the inductor can be calculated
by multiplying the square of the current in the inductor by the resistance of the winding
(I2R). In addition to copper loss, an iron core coil will have hysteresis and eddy-current
losses. Hysteresis loss is due to power that is consumed in reversing the magnetic field
of the inductor core each time the direction of current in the inductor changes. Eddy-
current loss is due to heating of the core by circulating currents that are induced in the
core by the magnetic field around the turns of the coil. All these losses dissipate power
in the form of heat. Inductor manufactures publish these power losses in their product
specification sheets.

     Manufacturers also rate their inductors in terms of insulation rating.  Common
ratings include:

             Class A rated 105 oC
             Class B rated 130 oC
             Class F rated 155 oC
             Class H rated 180 oC
             Class C rated 220 oC

Solenoids, Contactors  5-5                       Revision E
    The rating of a solenoid by the manufacturer therefore permits the associated
temperature rating to be used in Equation (5-2) in the following section and in Figure
5.2.

5.3.1 Temperature Multiplying Factor, CT

     For a specific solenoid stroke or rotation, the solenoid force or torque will decrease
as the solenoid coil temperature increases. A solenoid coil will tend to achieve a
stabilized coil temperature when operated at the manufacturer's rated power and duty
cycle. When operated under standard operating conditions, the coil insulation will not
be exceeded and the base failure rate can be assumed. It is important to determine the
power dissipation and surface area of the solenoid to assure that the insulation
temperature rating is not exceeded. Heat in a solenoid is a function of power and the
time during which power is applied. Heat can be dissipated by controlling the air flow,
by mounting the solenoid on a surface (heat sink) large enough to dissipate the energy
or other cooling method.

     Wear of moving parts and solenoid electrical contacts can change mechanical
tolerances, resulting in increased electrical current through the solenoid coil when the
solenoid is energized and possible premature failure. Energizing the solenoid at
nominal design voltage does not normally impart any significant stress on the solenoid.
However, after degradation from electrical stress, energizing the solenoid at nominal
design voltages may result in solenoid failure. A temperature rise of the solenoid coil
must be carefully considered during the analysis of design reliability. Elevated ambient
temperatures must be projected such as the air flow design in enclosed relay cabinets.
Duty cycle and maximum ON time have a significant effect on coil temperature. Coil
temperature in turn affects the solenoid force or torque capability and its failure rate.
For a specific solenoid stroke or rotation, the solenoid force or torque will decrease as
the solenoid coil temperature increases.

    The following equation can be used to estimate the temperature multiplying factor:

                       CT  =  1             3                                      (5-2)
                                            
                                1.5  t      

where:                 t = (TR - TO ) - 20

                                  10

and:                   TR = Rated temperature of the solenoid, oC
                       TO = Operating temperature of the solenoid, oC

Solenoids, Contactors         5-6                                      Revision E
     The effect of temperature on the temperature multiplying factor is shown in Figure
5.2. As current flows through the coil, the wire becomes warmer and its resistance
increases. The gauge of the wire in the coil determines how much self-heating occurs.
The thermal mass of the solenoid helps to dissipate the heat. The following equation
predicts the coil's self-heating:

                       T = TA +10(33 S (I / A) 2 - 1 i (234 + TA )                   (5-3)

Where                   T = Temperature of the wire after S seconds, oC
                       TA = Ambient temperature, oC

                         S = Application time, seconds
                       A = Conductor area, mils 2
                        I = Application current, amps

     When a solenoid is actuated, current is applied to the coil resulting in a temperature
rise of the coil. When a solenoid is energized continuously, heating of the coil increases
until a saturation level is reached which is equal to the ambient heat radiation. When a
solenoid is operated in an intermittent (on-off) manner, the on-time becomes critical if
higher voltages (thus currents) are applied to the coil. These higher currents cause
higher coil temperatures which can exceed the cooling capacity of the solenoid through
ambient radiation. This heat rise can thermally destroy the solenoid's coil. To avoid
such a catastrophic failure, there is a maximum "on" time which is the longest time a
solenoid can be energized without thermal damage.

                       Duty Cycle (%) =  ON Time            i 100                    (5-4)

                                         OnTime + Off Time

     Solenoids have a maximum ON time for a given duty cycle, wattage and power
input. For example, if a solenoid is energized for one second out of four (25% duty
cycle), its ON time of one second will cause no damage. However, if the solenoid is
energized for 10 minutes out of every 40 minutes (25% duty cycle), the coil could be
damaged if not rated for continuous duty.

5.3.2 Application Service Factor, CK

     The projected failure rate of a solenoid is dependent on the expected operating
environment of the equipment containing the solenoid. It is also dependent on the

Solenoids, Contactors                    5-7                             Revision E
length of stroke or degree of rotation and the side loading or torque. Table 5-2 provides
multiplying factors for solenoid application in the intended operating environment.

                       Table 5-2. Solenoid Application Service Factor, CK

  Operating            Normal load  Normal load         High load or  High load or
Environment             or torque,   or torque,            torque,       torque,
                         minimum      extended                          extended
Uniform                  stroke or    stroke or           minimum       stroke or
Light shock               rotation     rotation           stroke or      rotation
Medium                                                     rotation
shock                        1.1          1.3                               1.4
Heavy shock                  1.2          1.4                 1.2           1.5
                                                              1.3
                             1.3          1.5                               1.6
                                                              1.4
                             1.4          1.6                               1.7
                                                              1.5

5.4 FAILURE RATE OF CONTACTOR ASSEMBLY

     Contactor life depends on their structure and the chemical and electrical operating
environment. Failure of an electrical contact can be assumed when the contact
resistance increases to approximately twice the initial value. The failure rate of the
contactor can be written as (Reference 28):

                                     C = C,B i m i I n                                 (5-5)

Where:   C = Failure rate of contactor assembly, failures/million operations
        C,B = Base failure rate of contactor assembly, failures/million

                  operations

           = Voltage across contactor assembly, volts

           I = Current, amperes

           m = Voltage constant
           n = Current constant

A more general equation can be written for AC resistive loads (Reference 28):

Solenoids, Contactors               5-8                                    Revision E
                       C = C,B i C i CI                    (5-6)

Where:   C = Failure rate of contactor assembly, failures/million operations
        C,B = Base Failure of contactor assembly, resistive load, 1.10

                 failures/million operations

        CV = Multiplying factor considering contactor voltage (See Figure 5.3)
         CI = Multiplying factor considering contactor current (See Figure 5.4)

     For AC inductive loads, the power factor must be considered, modifying Equation
(5-7) as follows (Reference 28):

                       C = C,B i C i CI i CPF              (5-7)

Where:   C = Failure rate of contactor assembly, failures/million operations
        C,B = Base failure rate of contactor assembly, inductive load, 3.60

                  failures/million operations

         CV = Multiplying factor considering contactor voltage (See Figure 5.3)
         CI = Multiplying factor considering contactor current (See Figure 5.4)
        CPF = Multiplying factor considering the power factor (See Figure 5.5)

     DC loads generate greater arcing across the contacts than do AC loads. The failure
rate equation for a contactor with DC loads is written as follows (Reference 28):

                       C = C,B i C i CI                    (5-8)

Where:   C = Failure rate of contactor assembly, failures/million operations
        C,B = Base Failure of contactor assembly, DC load, 2.5 failures/million

                  operations

         CV = Multiplying factor considering contactor voltage (See Figure 5.6)
         CI = Multiplying factor considering contactor current (See Figure 5.7)

Solenoids, Contactors  5-9                     Revision E
                                     10000.000

                                     1000.000

Temperature Multiplying Factor, C T  100.000

                                     10.000

                                     1.000

                                     0.100

                                     0.010

                                     0.001

                                                60            40     20    0            -20         -40

                                                                         T R -T O , oC

                                                CT  =      1  t  3
                                                         1.5     
                                                                 

where:                                          t = (TR - TO ) - 20

                                                           10

                                     TR = Rated temperature of the solenoid, oC
                                     TO = Operating temperature of the solenoid, oC

                                                Figure 5.2 Multiplying Factor for Coil Temperature

Solenoids, Contactors                                                5-10                           Revision E
AC Voltrage Multiplying Factor, C V  1.4
                                     1.2
                                     1.0
                                     0.8
                                     0.6
                                     0.4
                                     0.2
                                     0.0

                                         0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4

                                                                           V o / V r , volts

                                     CV  =    Vo  0.75
                                              Vr  
                                                  

Where: Vo = Operating voltage, volts
          Vr = Rated voltage, volts

                                         Figure 5.3 Multiplying Factor for AC Contactor Voltage

Solenoids, Contactors                                   5-11  Revision E
AC Current Multiplying Factor, C I  5.0
                                    4.5
                                    4.0
                                    3.5
                                    3.0
                                    2.5
                                    2.0
                                    1.5
                                    1.0
                                    0.5
                                    0.0

                                        0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4

                                                                          I o / I r , amperes

                                    CI  =  3.50    Io   1.14
                                                   Ir  
                                                       

Where: Io = Operating current, amperes
          Ir = Rated current, amperes

                                        Figure 5.4 Multiplying Factor for AC Contactor Current

Solenoids, Contactors                                         5-12  Revision E
Power Factor Multiplying Factor, C PF  4.5
                                       4.0
                                       3.5
                                       3.0
                                       2.5
                                       2.0
                                       1.5
                                       1.0
                                       0.5
                                       0.0

                                          0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80 0.90 1.00
                                                                                   Power Factor, PF

                                            CPF = 4.0 ( PF ) 2

                                       Figure 5.5 Multiplying Factor for Power Factor

Solenoids, Contactors                  5-13                                            Revision E
DC Voltage Multiplying Factor, C V  1.3
                                    1.2
                                    1.1
                                    1.0
                                    0.9
                                    0.8
                                    0.7
                                    0.6
                                    0.5
                                    0.4
                                    0.3
                                    0.2
                                    0.1
                                    0.0

                                        0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3

                                                                          V o / V r , volts

                                             Vo    1.33
                                             Vr  
                                    CV  =        

Where:                                           Vo = Operating voltage, volts
                                                 Vr = Rated voltage, volts

                                                 Figure 5.6 Multiplying Factor for DC Contactor Voltage

Solenoids, Contactors                                    5-14                   Revision E
                                    6.0

                                    5.5

                                    5.0

DC Current Multiplying Factor, C I  4.5

                                    4.0

                                    3.5

                                    3.0

                                    2.5

                                    2.0

                                    1.5

                                    1.0

                                    0.5

                                    0.0

                                         0.0        0.2    0.4  0.6   0.8           1.0                  1.2

                                                                I o / I r, amperes

CI                                  =  4.20     Io   1.30
                                                Ir  
                                                    

                                    Where: Io = Operating current, amperes

                                              Ir = Rated current, amperes

                                                 Figure 5.7 Multiplying Factor for DC Contactor Current

Solenoids, Contactors                                           5-15                     Revision E
5.5 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 5, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of
solenoids, relays and contactors.

28. MIL-HDBK-217, "Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment".

81. TD 84-3 R&M Data for Industrial Plants, A.P. Harris and Associates, 1984

111. Johnson Electric, Solenoid Technical Data, May 2008

126. Maintenance and Application Guide for Control Relays and Timers, Electric
        Power Research Institute, EPRI TR 102067s, December 1993

Solenoids, Contactors  5-16  Revision E
                       6 CHAPTER

                                        VALVE ASSEMBLIES

6.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     6.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... 1
     6.2 FAILURE MODES OF VALVE ASSEMBLIES ................................................... 3
     6.3 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR POPPET ASSEMBLY ....................................... 6

        6.3.1 Fluid Pressure ........................................................................................... 10
        6.3.2 Allowable Leakage .................................................................................... 10
        6.3.3 Surface Finish ........................................................................................... 10
        6.3.4 Fluid Viscosity ........................................................................................... 10
        6.3.5 Contamination Sensitivity .......................................................................... 11
        6.3.6 Contact Pressure....................................................................................... 12
        6.3.7 Physical Dimensions ................................................................................. 14
        6.3.8 Operating Temperature ............................................................................. 14
        6.3.9 Other Considerations ................................................................................ 14
     6.4 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR SLIDING ACTION VALVES ............................ 15
        6.4.1 Fluid Pressure ........................................................................................... 17
        6.4.2 Allowable Leakage .................................................................................... 18
        6.4.3 Contamination Sensitivity .......................................................................... 18
        6.4.4 Fluid Viscosity ........................................................................................... 18
        6.4.5 Spool-to-Sleeve Clearance ....................................................................... 19
        6.4.6 Friction Coefficient..................................................................................... 19
     6.5 FAILURE RATE ESTIMATE FOR HOUSING ASSEMBLY.............................. 19
     6.6 REFERENCES ................................................................................................ 32

6.1 INTRODUCTION

     This chapter contains procedures for evaluating fluid valve assemblies for reliability
that can be used to support the development of mechanical equipment. The procedures
are intended to focus attention on possible failure modes of a valve assembly and
project the rate of failure for the valve in its intended operating environment.

     A valve is a device that regulates the flow of a fluid including gases, liquids and
fluidized solids by opening, closing or adjusting various passageways. A typical valve
assembly is shown in Figure 6.1.

Valve Assemblies  6-1  Revision E
                               Figure 6.1 Typical Valve Configuration

     Valves may be designed to be operated manually or may be automatically operated
by changes in pressure, temperature or flow. These changes may act upon a
diaphragm or a piston which in turn activates the valve. The most common valve to
open and close passage of fluid is the poppet type valve shown in Figure 6.2. More
complex control systems using valves requiring automatic control based on an external
input require an actuator as a component within the valve. The actuator strokes the
valve depending on its input signal and set-up, allowing the valve to be positioned
accurately and allowing control over a variety of flow requirements. This type of valve
called a sliding action valve is shown in Figure 6.5.

     Valves are normally categorized by their function in the system design such as a
ball valve, butterfly valve, check valve, control valve and gate valve. Inside the valve
there are two basic designs including the poppet valve and sliding action valve
described above. This chapter will describe the procedures for evaluating each of these
basic designs for reliability. Basic parts of the valve include the valve seat for a poppet
valve, sliding action mechanism for a sliding action valve, seals and packings to prevent
the escape of fluid from the valve, a body and/or bonnet that form the valve casing,
springs to maintain valve positioning and a device such a solenoid to actuate the valve.

     After the failure rates are determined for each component part of the valve, the
results are summed to determine the failure rate of the total valve assembly. A basic
failure rate equation can be written as follows:

Valve Assemblies  6-2  Revision E
                 VA = PO + SE + SP + SO + HO                                        (6-1)

for a poppet type valve, or

                 VA = SV + SE + SP + SO + HO                                        (6-2)

for a sliding-action valve.

Where:  VA = Failure rate of total valve assembly in failures/million operations

        PO = Failure rate of poppet assembly in failures/million operations as
                  derived from Section 6.3

        SV = Failure rate of sliding action valve assembly in failures/million
                  operations as derived from Section 6.4

        SE = Failure rate of the seals in failures/million operations as derived
                  from Chapter 3

        SP = Failure rate of spring(s) in failures/million operations as derived
                  from Chapter 4

        SO = Failure rate of solenoid in failures/million operations as derived
                  from Chapter 5

        HO = Failure rate of valve housing as derived from Section 6.5

6.2 FAILURE MODES OF VALVE ASSEMBLIES

     Failure modes of a valve assembly are identified from the analyst's knowledge of
the valve's design characteristics and the intended operating environment. Table 6-1
provides a summary of valve failure modes to be considered. Many valve assemblies
are uniquely designed for special applications and a more detailed analysis is often
required for those failure modes identified as critical or where results of the analysis
indicate that an additional investigation is warranted. Failure rate models in this
Handbook are based on the identification of failure modes with multiplying factors that
modify a base failure rate considering the particular design characteristics and intended
operating environment. This approach permits the estimate of an occurrence probability
for individual failure modes.

Valve Assemblies  6-3                                                   Revision E
                  Table 6-1. Failure Modes for a Valve Assembly

     FAILURE MODE            FAILURE CAUSE                 LOCAL EFFECT

Seal leakage              - Embrittlement            - Internal or external valve
                          - Installation damage       leakage
Worn or damaged poppet    - Wear
seat                      - Surface damage           - Poppet not seating
                          - Distortion                 properly causing internal
                          - Dynamic instability        leakage and low/erratic
                                                       pressure drop
                          - Wear of poppet/seat
                           Assembly                  - Poor valve response
                                                     - Failure to open and/or
                          - Contaminants
                                                        close
Damaged valve stem        - Vibration, shock         - Internal leakage

Worn or damaged spool     - Contaminants             - Low/erratic pressure
                          - Misalignment               drop

Sticking valve piston in  - Contaminants             - Slow operating response
main valve body           - Loss of lubrication      - Valve immobile
                          - Air entrapment
                          - Excessively high         - Unable to adjust or
                                                        maintain pressure
                           temperature
                          - Structural interference  - Valve fails to open or
                                                        close
Broken spring or damaged - Fatigue
spring ends                                          - Poppet Stem Wear
                                                     - External leakage
Inoperative solenoid      - Open coil winding
assembly                  - Misalignment of

                           solenoid with respect
                           to spool or poppet
                           stem

External leakage          - Contaminants

Cracked fitting/housing   - Fatigue
                          - External shock
                          - Vibration

Valve Assemblies                    6-4                          Revision E
     The primary failure mode of the poppet valve seating surface is wear caused by the
impact of contaminants. In a gas valve, contaminants include liquids under pressure. A
valve seat will wear where the sealing element contacts the seat. The local effect is
insufficient seating and internal leakage. However, assuming the correct seat material
for the application and minimal contaminants, the failure rate of the valve due to seating
wear should be minimal. The sealing element may be a poppet, plate or ring. Possible
failure modes for the sealing element include fatigue failure caused by repeated impact
on the valve seat, sudden changes in differential pressure across the valve, and
contaminants causing corrosion.

     The failure rate of a compression spring is usually very low depending on the
application. However, it is important to consider the operating environment of the valve
when estimating the failure rate of the return spring. The spring material in a gas valve
may not be resistant to all gas compositions. Likewise, in any valve it is important to
consider the compatibility of the fluid and potential contaminants with the spring
material. Failure modes of the stop plate are the same as the valve seat. The wear
area of the stop plate is where the spring contacts the plate. This wear is minimal
assuming correct hardness of the plate material.

     For a sliding action valve the main failure modes to be considered include internal
leakage caused by a worn spool and slow response of the valve caused by a sticking
piston. As with a poppet valve the chief cause of a worn spool or slow response is the
presence of contaminants. Assistance with evaluating the valve parts such as O-rings
and solenoids for reliability can be found in the appropriate chapters of this Handbook.

     After the basic parts of the valve are evaluated for reliability, the dynamics of the
valve must be considered. Again, the spring is probably most critical to estimating the
failure rate of the valve. For example, a sticking sealing element caused by a
misaligned spring resulting in poor dynamic response is a potential failure mode that
needs to be considered. Pressure differential, operating temperature, viscosity and use
rate are variables that determine the failure rate of the valve. Surface finish of the
poppet, allowable leakage, and a contaminant factor considering flow rate are used to
estimate the failure rate of the poppet due to wear from contaminants. The failure rates
of valve seals, the return spring and the solenoid driver are determined separately. See
Chapters 3, 4 and 5.

     Typical failure modes for a valve assembly are listed in Table 6-1. It should be
noted that the failure modes, failure causes and failure effects may be interchanged
depending upon the type of analysis being performed. For example, a functional
analysis will tend to identify those entries in Table 6-1 under local effect as the failure
mode while a very detailed hardware analysis would result in the identification of those
entries under failure cause as the failure mode.

Valve Assemblies  6-5  Revision E
6.3 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR POPPET ASSEMBLY

     The term poppet refers to those valves in which the valve element travels
perpendicular to a plane through the seating surface. The poppet valve element is used
in flow control, pressure control and directional control valves. In a poppet valve, a
relatively large flow area is provided with short travel of the poppet. This characteristic
simplifies the actuator requirements and permits the use of solenoids and diaphragms,
which are characteristically short stroke devices.

     Figure 6.2 illustrates the operation of a simple poppet valve. The valve consists
primarily of a movable poppet which closes against a valve seat. The valve may be
actuated manually or by electrical, mechanical or pneumatic means. This chapter of the
manual discusses the valve mechanism itself. Refer to Chapter 5 for procedures to
evaluate the reliability of the solenoid and to other appropriate chapters of the manual to
determine the reliability of other components of the actuation mechanism. In the closed
position, fluid pressure on the inlet side tends to hold the valve tightly closed. A force
applied to the top of the valve stem opens the poppet and allows fluid to flow through
the valve.

                                    Figure 6.2 Poppet Valve Assembly

     The poppet fits into the center bore of the seat. The seating surfaces of the poppet
and the seat are lapped or closely machined so that the center bore will be sealed when
the poppet is seated. An O-ring is usually installed on the stem of the poppet to prevent
leakage past this portion of the poppet assembly.

     Table 6-2 is a list of typical failure modes, mechanisms and causes for a poppet
assembly. A review of failure rate data suggests the following characteristics be
included in the evaluation of poppet assembly reliability:

             · Leakage requirement
             · Material hardness
             · Surface irregularities

Valve Assemblies  6-6  Revision E
        · Fluid viscosity
        · Fluid/material compatibility
        · Fluid pressure
        · Physical size of poppet/seat
        · Q.C./manufacturing processes
        · Contamination level
        · Utilization rate

           Table 6-2. Failure Rate Considerations for a Poppet Assembly

       FAILURE MODE     FAILURE MECHANISMS          FAILURE CAUSES
Internal Leakage     Worn poppet/seat
                                             - Contaminants
Poor Response        Sticking/jammed poppet
External Leakage     assembly                - Side Loading
                     Wear of poppet stem     - Incorrect spring pressure
                                             - Contaminants

                                             - Contaminants

     A new poppet assembly (or fairly new if some initial deformation exists) may be
expected to have a sufficiently smooth surface finish for the valve to meet internal
leakage specifications. However, after some period of time contaminants will cause
wear of the poppet/seat assembly until the leakage rate is beyond tolerance. This
leakage rate, at which point the valve is considered to have failed, will depend upon the
application.

     A failure rate equation for a poppet assembly is dependent upon the ratio of actual
leakage rate to that allowable under conditions of usage. This rate can be expressed as
follows:

                                    Qa  
                     PO     PO,B    Qf  
                         =                                               (6-3)

Where:   PO = Failure rate of the poppet assembly, failures/million operations
        PO,B = Base failure rate for poppet assembly, failure/million operations

          Qa = Leakage rate, in3/min
          Qf = Leakage rate considered to be valve failure, in3/min

Valve Assemblies            6-7              Revision E
    The allowable leakage, Qf is determined from design drawings, specifications or

knowledge of component applications. The actual leakage rate, Qa is determined from

the following equation (Reference 22):

                   ( ) Qa                         P22
                  =  2  x  102  DM f  3 P12 -          K1                    (6-4)
                                a LW  ( SS ) 1.5

Where:  Qa = Actual fluid leakage, in3/min
        DM = Mean seat diameter, in

          f = Mean surface finish of opposing surfaces, in
        P1 = Upstream pressure, lb/in2
        P2 = Downstream pressure, lb/in2

        a = Absolute fluid viscosity, lbf-min/in2

        LW = Radial seat land width, in
        SS = Seat stress, lb/in2

        K1 = Constant which considers the impact of contaminant

                   size, hardness and quantity of particles

     Failure rate of the poppet assembly will be dependent upon leakage rate and those
factors which influence the deterioration of surface finish such as rate of cycling,
material properties and contaminants. Deterioration of the poppet and seat by
contaminants is dependent upon material properties and the number of contaminants,
and that part of the time the poppet is open and subject to contaminants under fluid
pressure.

     A contamination factor can be derived from the following equation:

                  Z = ( function of ) [ ,n,Q,d,T ]                           (6-5)

Where:            Z = Poppet / seat degradation
                   = Contaminant wear coefficient, in3/particle
                  n = Number of contaminant particles/in3
                  Q = Flow rate, in3/min

Valve Assemblies                6-8                              Revision E
                   d = Ratio of time the poppet is open to total operating time
                   T = Temperature of operation, F

     Table 6-5 provides typical quantities of contaminants for use in establishing a
multiplying factor. By normalizing the equation to those values for which historical
failure rate data are available the following model can be derived:

        PO = PO,B i CP i CQ i CF i C i CN i CS i CDT i CSW i CW              (6-6)

Where:   PO = Failure rate of poppet assembly in failures/million operations

        PO,B = Base failure rate of poppet assembly, 1.40 failures/million
                   operations (See Chapter 1 for derivation)

          CP = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid pressure on
                   the base failure rate (See Figure 6.6)

          CQ = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of allowable leakage
                    on the base failure rate (See Figure 6.7)

          CF = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of surface finish on
                   the base failure rate (See Figure 6.8)

          C = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid viscosity and
                   temperature on the base failure rate (See Table 6-6 and Figure
                   6.15)

          CN = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of contaminants on
                   the base failure rate (See Table 6-5)

          CS = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the contact
                   pressure on the base failure rate (See Figure 6.9)

         CDT = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the seat diameter
                   on the base failure rate (See Figure 6.10)

        CSW = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of the seat land
                    width on the base failure rate (See Figure 6.11)

         CW = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of flow rate on the
                   base failure rate (See Figure 6.14)

     The following paragraphs provide background information on those parameters
included in the model.

Valve Assemblies  6-9                                            Revision E
6.3.1 Fluid Pressure

         Figure 6.6 contains the fluid pressure multiplying factors for use in the equation.
Valves having high response characteristics and consequently a high poppet velocity
will incur large impact loading which tends to reduce the life expectancy of the valve.
As with any piece of mechanical equipment, the higher the structural loads the shorter
the life. Pressure forces arise from any net pressure unbalance acting on the valve
element. Depending upon the functional design of the valve, the pressure force may
increase, decrease, or virtually have no effect on the actuation force. In an unbalanced
valve design such as a conventional poppet, upstream pressure normally acts in a
direction to seat the valve so that an increasing upstream pressure will tend to force the
valve element tighter against its seat. The use of pressure unbalance to aid in sealing
requires a higher actuation force to open the valve. When the size of the valve and/or
magnitude of pressure demand excessively large actuation forces, a balanced design
and/or piloting are often utilized. In most cases the pressure on the poppet can be
assumed to be the system upstream pressure, P1, minus the downstream pressure, P2.

6.3.2 Allowable Leakage

     Figure 6.7 shows the allowable leakage multiplying factor for use in equation 6-6.
Allowable internal leakage of a poppet design can be obtained from valve
specifications. Leakage requirements vary from molecular flow for certain shutoff
valves at one extreme to several cubic feet per minute in some inexpensive valves
which control water or other inexpensive fluid. Allowable leakage must be evaluated
with respect to total mission and operational requirements.

6.3.3 Surface Finish

     Evaluation of surface finish involves both poppet and seat assemblies. Surface
finishes will usually be specified on assembly drawings in terms of microinches or by a
manufacturing process. Typical surface finishes for manufacturing processes are
provided in Table 6-4. These values are for a finish as initially manufactured and a new
valve can be expected to have a sufficiently smooth surface finish to meet internal
leakage specifications. However, after some period of time contaminants will cause
wear of the poppet/seat assembly until leakage rate is beyond tolerance. This
deterioration of surface finish will be influenced by operating temperature and pressure,
rate of cycling, loads and material properties.

6.3.4 Fluid Viscosity

     Viscosity of a fluid is much more dependent on temperature than it is on pressure.
For example, when air pressure is increased from 1 atmosphere to 50, its viscosity is
only increased by about 10%. In contrast, Figure 6.3 shows the dependence of

Valve Assemblies       6-10  Revision E
viscosity on temperature for some common fluids. The graph shows how viscosity of
liquids decreases with temperature while that of gases increases with temperature.
Multiplying factors for viscosities of typical fluids are provided in Table 6-6. Multiplying
factors for other fluids are determined from the table by a knowledge of viscosity at the
applicable fluid temperature. Viscosity for a specific fluid is obtainable from many
reference sources. If the value located is in terms of kinematic viscosity, multiply the
value by the specific gravity (density) at the desired temperature to determine the
dynamic viscosity.

                          10000.000

                          1000.000

Viscosity in Centipoises  100.000             SAE 20        SAE 50

                          10.000

                                                      Diesel Fuel

                          1.000

                          0.100                      Water
                                              Air

                          0.010        0.000  50.000 100.000 150.000 200.000 250.000 300.000 350.000
                              -50.000                       Temperature, degrees F

                                     Figure 6.3 Dynamic Viscosities of Various Fluids

6.3.5 Contamination Sensitivity

     Cleanliness of the system and of the fluid medium has a direct effect upon the
operation and life of a poppet valve. Contaminants can clog or jam the poppet and
cause excessive leakage in metal-to-metal seated valves. Particulate matter in

Valve Assemblies                                      6-11                             Revision E
gaseous media, especially in the lighter gases such as helium, can be extremely
destructive to internal parts, particularly seats, because of the very high velocity that can
be attained under sonic conditions.

     The analysis of particle sizes includes the determination of upstream filter size, the
filter maintenance schedule, the number of upstream components between the valve
and filter, and the number of particles likely to be encountered at the poppet/seat
assembly. Table 6-5 lists typical quantities of contaminants for use in determining the
multiplying factor.

6.3.6 Contact Pressure

     The force applied by the poppet against the seat is found by actual measurement or

design specifications. In the typical valve seat example of Figure 6.4, the seat area AST

can be computed as follows:

                            ( ) 

                        AST =
                        D12 - D22                                                (6-7)
                           4

Where:  AST = Seat Area, in2
         D1 = Outside diameter of poppet, in
         D2 = Diameter of poppet shaft, in

And the force of the poppet against the seat is:                                 (6-8)

                   FS = AST ( P1 - P2 )

Where:            FS = Force on seat, lb
                  P1 = Upstream fluid pressure, psi
                  P2 = Downstream fluid pressure, psi

The seat land area acting as a seal when the valve is closed, is calculated by:

                            ( ) 

                        ASL =
                        D12 - D32                                                (6-9)
                          4

Valve Assemblies        6-12                           Revision E
Where:            ASL = Seat land area, in2
                  D3 = Inside diameter of valve outlet

     Then the expression for contact pressure, SS, is the force applied to the seat divided
by the seat land area:

                      SS  =  FS                                     (6-10)
                             ASL

Therefore:

                  SS  = (P1 - P2 )  AST                             (6-11)
                                    ASL

                        Figure 6.4 Typical Poppet Valve Seat Configuration

     The minimum contact pressure to prevent leakage for most materials is
approximately three times the fluid pressure. In Equation (6-4), leakage varies inversely
with the seat stress raised to the 1.5 power. Therefore, a multiplying factor for the effect
of contact pressure on the valve base failure rate can be derived as follows:

Valve Assemblies                    6-13                Revision E
                      =      9000 1.5
                  CS        0.26                          (6-12)
                                    SS  

Figure 6.9 provides the multiplying factors for different values of contact pressure.

6.3.7 Physical Dimensions

     The poppet diameter, seat diameter, and seat land width are shown in Figure 6.4.
Figures 6.10 and 6.11 provide multiplying factors for seat diameter and land width.

6.3.8 Operating Temperature

     The duty cycle of a poppet valve can vary from several on-off cycles to many
hundreds of cycles per hour. Multiple cycling under high pressure or operating
temperature decreases the life of the valve. The rate of cycling may be important if the
temperature rise, as a result of the operation, becomes significant. The effects of fluid
temperature on failure rate are included in the fluid viscosity multiplying factor, C.

6.3.9 Other Considerations

     Several failure rate considerations are not specifically included in the model but
rather included in the base failure rate. The base failure rate is an average value which
reflects field performance data. The following items can be used as a check list to
assure that the potential failure mechanisms have been considered:

· Fluid medium considerations which are important in valve designs include
    the physical properties of the fluid and the compatibility of the fluid with
    poppet/seat materials. Corrosive fluids will rapidly change the surface finish.
    The state and physical properties of the fluid become particularly important in
    determining pressure drop and flow capacity.

· In considering maintenance, requirements for special tasks must be
    identified. Valve seats should be accessible and easily replaced, preferably
    without removing the valve from its circuit. When it is necessary to service a
    valve in the field, care must be exercised to insure that contamination from
    the work area is not introduced into the valve or system. Requirements for
    lubrication and adjustments should be minimized to provide high reliability in
    service use.

· While critical design features are usually based upon one primary fluid,
    consideration must also be given to secondary fluids with which the valving

Valve Assemblies                        6-14  Revision E
              unit will be required to operate during cleaning and testing operations.

         · The location of the valve in the circuit must be considered when considering
              system failure modes and failure rates. For example, in some circuits a
              backup control valve is used to permit continued operation in event one valve
              becomes stuck in the open or closed position.

6.4 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR SLIDING ACTION VALVES
     Sliding action valves are usually designed such that a spool slides longitudinally to

block and uncover ports in the housing. A rotary spool is sometimes used. Sealing is
accomplished by a very closely machined fit between the spool and the valve body. A
typical sliding action valve is shown in Figure 6.5.

                               Figure 6.5 Sliding Action Valve Assembly

     A primary advantage of sliding action valves is the feasibility of obtaining a
pressure-balanced design. An inherent disadvantage of sliding action valves is
leakage, a problem which can only be controlled by close machining or reliable dynamic
sealing techniques. Diametrical spool clearances of approximately 50 microinches are
common and surface finishes of 4 to 6 microinches are standard requirements for
spools and sleeves. Therefore, contamination tolerance and dirt sensitivity are critical
factors in the design and use of sliding action valves, and reliability will be directly
affected by dirt particles. Force balances, flow rate and general mechanical operation
can be influenced by the presence of contaminants within the valve. Contamination
problems include wear of the spool and sleeve until the leakage rate is beyond
tolerance. The steps to investigating internal leakage are the same as for the poppet
type valve. Table 6-3 is a list of failure modes, mechanisms and causes for spool
assemblies. Other failure modes should be identified for the specific application and
evaluated to determine the applicability of the failure rate model to the analysis being
performed.

Valve Assemblies  6-15  Revision E
        Table 6-3. Failure Rate Considerations for Sliding Action Valve

       FAILURE MODE       FAILURE MECHANISMS        FAILURE CAUSES
Internal leakage
Poor response             Worn spool/sleeve         - Contaminants
                                                    - Side loading
External leakage
Valve port fails to open  Sticking sleeve assembly  - Side Loading
                                                    - Incorrect spring pressure
                                                    - Contaminants

                          Worn gasket/seal          - Contaminants

                          Jammed sleeve assembly - Excessive side loading
                                                                  - Contaminants

     An equation similar to that for poppet valves can be used to predict the reliability of
a sliding action valve:

                          P12 - P22  1/ 2  
                           Qf a
                  (  ) SV = SV ,B B2 DSP                                 (6-13)

Where:   SV = Failure rate of sliding action valve assembly in failures/million

                    operations

        SV,B = Base failure rate = 1.25 failures/million operations

           B = Spool clearance, in

         DSP = Spool diameter, in
          P1 = Upstream pressure, lb/in2
          P2 = Downstream pressure, lb/in2

          a = Absolute fluid viscosity, lb-min/in2

          Qf = Leakage rate considered to be device failure, in3/min
            = Friction coefficient

            = Contaminant wear coefficient, in3/particle

            = Number of contaminant particles/in3

Valve Assemblies          6-16                      Revision E
     By normalizing the characteristic equation to those values for which historical failure
rate data are available, the following model can be derived:

                  SV = SV ,B i CP i CQ i C i CN i CB i CDS i C i CW              (6-14)

Where:  SV,B = Base failure rate, 1.25 failures/million operations

          CP = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid pressure on

                   the base failure rate (See Figure 6.6)

          CQ = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of allowable leakage

                   on the base failure rate (See Figure 6.7)

        C = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid

                 viscosity/temperature on the base failure rate (See Table 6-6 and
                 Figure 6.15)

        CN = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of fluid contaminants

                 on the base failure rate (See Table 6-5)

         CBB = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spool clearance

                 on the base failure rate (See Figure 6.12)

        CDS = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of spool diameter on

                 the base failure rate (See Figure 6.13)

        C = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of friction coefficient

                 on the base failure rate (See Table 6-7)

        CW = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of flow rate on the

                 base failure rate (See Figure 6.14)

6.4.1 Fluid Pressure

     In most sliding action valves the applied fluid pressure is the upstream pressure
minus the downstream pressure. Figure 6.6 provides the multiplying factors for fluid
pressure. Other factors in evaluating the effects of fluid pressure on valve reliability
include the following:

         Size - Structural strength becomes an increasingly important consideration with
         increasing valve size because pressure loads are a function of the square of the
         valve size.

Valve Assemblies  6-17                                               Revision E
Balance - If the valve is inherently pressure-balanced, the influence of pressure
upon such parameters as size and actuation forces will be far less than in the
case of an inherently unbalanced unit.

Pressure Induced Strain - Binding of certain close-tolerance sliding action valves
can result with excessive pressure load on a port.

Conditions of Pressure - Circumstances under which the valve unit is subjected
to high pressure must be considered. A drain valve, for example, may be
required to seal against high pressure, but never be required to open until after
the pressure has been relieved.

6.4.2 Allowable Leakage

     Allowable internal leakage of the sliding action valve can be obtained from valve
specifications usually in terms of quiescent flow or leakage flow. Quiescent flow is the
internal valve flow or leakage from supply-to-return with no flow in the load ports.
Allowable leakage will vary considerably according to the operational requirements.
Figure 6.7 provides multiplying factors for allowable leakage.

6.4.3 Contamination Sensitivity

     Cleanliness of the fluid medium and surrounding medium has a direct effect upon
the occurrence of stiction, weldment and general operation of sliding valve assemblies.
No fluid system is completely free of particulate contamination and sensitivity of a valve
to contamination is an important consideration in reliability.

     In sliding action valves there is a tradeoff between contamination sensitivity and
leakage based on clearances between the spool and sleeve. If leakage is minimized by
reducing the clearance between the valving element and its housing, a larger number of
contaminant particles can become lodged, causing valve failure. The clearance values
should be checked at both of the temperature extremes to which the valve will be
subjected, in order to ensure adequate design for the largest size of contamination
particle anticipated.

     The analysis of particle sizes includes the determination of upstream filter sizes, the
filter maintenance schedule, the number of upstream components between the valve
and filter, and the number of particles likely to be encountered at the spool assembly.
Table 6-5 provides typical quantities of contaminants for use in the failure rate equation.

6.4.4 Fluid Viscosity

     The dependence of viscosity on temperature change is shown in Figure 6.3. The
graph shows how viscosity of liquids decreases with temperature while that of gases

Valve Assemblies       6-18  Revision E
increases with temperature. Multiplying factors for viscosities of typical fluids are
provided in Table 6-6. Multiplying factors for other fluids are determined from the table
by a knowledge of viscosity at the applicable fluid temperature. Viscosity for a specific
fluid is obtainable from many reference sources. If the value located is in terms of
kinematic viscosity, divide the value by the specific gravity (density) at the desired
temperature to determine the dynamic specific gravity.

6.4.5 Spool-to-Sleeve Clearance

     Highly polished and uniform surface finishes of 4-6 microinches can usually be
assumed for a valve spool. The model assumes that the spool is environmentally
protected. If this is not the case, a separate analysis will be required to determine the
effects of aging and deterioration of the surfaces on the spool to sleeve clearance. A
diametrical spool clearance of 50 microinches is typical for sliding action valves. The
exact value is taken from assembly drawings. Figures 6.12 and 6.13 provide multiplying
factors for the spool-to-sleeve clearance and spool diameter.

6.4.6 Friction Coefficient

     A sticking valve spool is usually caused by contaminants. Particles can accumulate
between the spool and sleeve as part of the silting process until the build-up is sufficient
to cause stiction. Results include valve hunting, erratic regulation and eventual locking.
The silting process can be aggravated by inactivity of the valve. Another failure
mechanism to be considered is reduced clearance between the spool and sleeve
caused by soft metal particles being wedged and burnished on the surfaces. The actual
friction coefficient is used in the model. Table 6-7 contains friction coefficient values for
typical materials used in valve designs.

6.5 FAILURE RATE ESTIMATE FOR HOUSING ASSEMBLY

     There are many factors which could be considered in determining the potential rate
of fatigue failure of a valve housing including connectors. For critical safety related
applications, a review of the stress analysis is warranted. Normally, the probability of a
cracked housing is minimal and the failure rate is best determined from field experience
data.

                  HO = HO,B                                 (6-15)

Where: HO = Failure rate of valve housing, failures/million operating hours
           HO,B = Base failure rate of housing, 0.01 failures/million hours

Valve Assemblies  6-19                          Revision E
                                        100.000

                                        10.000

Fluid Pressure Multiplying Factor, C P  1.000

                                        0.100

                                        0.010

                                        0.001

                                        0.000           1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
                                                25
                                                                      Fluid Pressure Across Valve, P 1 -P 2 , psi

For P1 - P2 > 50 psi:

                                                 CP  =    P1 - P2  2
                                                          3000     

                                                          Figure 6.6 Fluid Pressure Multiplying Factor

Valve Assemblies                                                      6-20                              Revision E
                               4.0

                               3.5

                               3.0

Leakage Multiplying Factor,CQ  2.5

                               2.0

                               1.5

                               1.0

                               0.5

                               0.0          0.020  0.040 0.060 0.080 0.100                 0.120  0.140
                                 0.000
                                                         Allowable Leakage, Q f , in3/min

                               For leakage  >  0.03 in3/min,  CQ  =  0.055
                                                                      Qf

                               ( ) For leakage  0.03 in3/min, CQ = 4.2 - 79 Qf

                                            Figure 6.7 Allowable Leakage Multiplying Factor

Valve Assemblies                                                     6-21                         Revision E
                                       10.0

Surface Finish Multiplying Factor, CF  1.0

                                       0.1

                                       0.0
                                            5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95 105 115 125

                                                                            Surface Finish, f, microinches

                                             CF  =  f 1.65
                                                    353

Table 6-4 provides typical surface finishes

                                                    Figure 6.8 Surface Finish Multiplying Factor

Valve Assemblies                                            6-22                                  Revision E
                                     100.00

Seat Stress Multiplying Factor, C S  10.00

                                     1.00

                                     0.10           2000        4000  6000  8000 10000                   12000       14000
                                            0

                                                                  Poppet Contact Pressure, S S, lbs/in2

                                             CS  =  0.26   9000 1.5
                                                                
                                                            SS  

                                     where: SS = poppet contact pressure, lbs/in2

                                                    Figure 6.9 Contact Pressure Multiplying Factor

Valve Assemblies                                                      6-23                               Revision E
Seat Diameter Multiplying Factor, C DT  3.0
                                        2.5
                                        2.0
                                        1.5
                                        1.0
                                        0.5
                                        0.0

                                            0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
                                                                               Seat Diameter, DS, inches

                                        CDT = 1.1DS + 0.32

                                                Where DS = Seat Diameter, inches

                                        Figure 6.10 Seat Diameter Multiplying Factor

Valve Assemblies                        6-24                                          Revision E
Land Width Multiplying Factor, C SW    3.500
                                       3.000
                                       2.500
                                       2.000
                                       1.500
                                       1.000
                                       0.500
                                       0.000

                                             0.00 0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16 0.20 0.24 0.28 0.32 0.36 0.40
                                                                                Land Width, L W , inches

                                   For LW  0.34, CSW = 3.55 - 24.52 LW + 72.99 LW 2 - 85.75 LW 3
                                   For LW > 0.34, CSW = 0.25

                                     Figure 6.11 Land Width Multiplying Factor

Valve Assemblies                     6-25                                       Revision E
                                         4.0

                                         3.5

Spool Clearance Multiplying Factor, C B  3.0

                                         2.5

                                         2.0

                                         1.5

                                         1.0

                                         0.5

                                         0.0

                                         200  400            600          800   1000 1200 1400

                                                                Spool Clearance, B, microinches

                                         For B < 500in, CB = 0.42

                                         For B > 500in,  CB  =  6  B2
                                                                   x 105

                                              Figure 6.12 Spool Clearance Multiplying Factor

Valve Assemblies                                                          6-26                   Revision E
Spool Diameter Multiplying Factor, C DS   2.50
                                          2.25
                                          2.00
                                          1.75
                                          1.50
                                          1.25
                                          1.00
                                          0.75
                                          0.50
                                          0.25
                                          0.00

                                                0.3 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.8 2.2 2.6 3.0 3.4 3.7
                                                                                Spool Diameter, D SP , inches

                                         CDS = 0.615 DSP

                                         Figure 6.13 Spool Diameter Multiplying Factor

Valve Assemblies                         6-27                                           Revision E
Flow Rate Multiplying Factor, C W  3.20
                                   3.00
                                   2.80
                                   2.60
                                   2.40
                                   2.20
                                   2.00
                                   1.80
                                   1.60
                                   1.40
                                   1.20
                                   1.00
                                   0.80

                                               0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
                                                       Ratio of Actual Flow Rate to Manufacturer's Rating, F L

                                           CW = 1.0 + FL2

                                   Figure 6.14 Flow Rate Multiplying Factor

Valve Assemblies                   6-28                                      Revision E
                                   1000.000           Air
                                    100.000              Water
                                      10.000
Viscosity Multiplying Factor, C v
                                   1.000              SAE 20
                                   0.100
                                   0.010                             SAE 50

                                   0.001

                                   0.000

                                              -50  0  50        100   150    200        250        300         350

                                                                Temperature, degrees F

See Table 6-6 for values of typical fluid viscosities

                                                   Figure 6.15 Fluid Viscosity Multiplying Factor

Valve Assemblies                                                6-29                               Revision E
Table 6-4. Typical Surface Finishes for Manufacturing Processes

 PROCESS                   SURFACE                          PROCESS       SURFACE
                           FINISH, in                                     FINISH, in
Lapping                                                  Boring, turning
Polishing                       2 - 16                   Electron beam      16 - 250
Honing                          4 - 16                   Reaming            32 - 250
Grinding                        4 - 32                   Milling            32 - 125
Burnishing                      4 - 64                   Drilling           32 - 250
                                8 - 16                                      64 - 250

                  Table 6-5. Contaminant Multiplying Factor, CN

TYPICAL QUANTITIES OF                        PARTICLE    NUMBER PARTICLES
PARTICLES PRODUCED BY                        MATERIAL    UNDER 10 MICRON PER
HYDRAULIC COMPONENTS                                     HOUR PER RATED GPM
                                                 steel   (N10)
      Piston Pump                                steel
      Gear Pump                                  steel           0.017
      Vane Pump                                  steel           0.019
      Cylinder                                   steel           0.006
      Sliding action valve                       rubber          0.008
      Hose                                                       0.0004
                                                                 0.0013

                  CN  =    CO   3  i  FR  i  N 10
                           C10  
                                

Where:             Co = System filter size in microns
                  C10 = Standard system filter size = 10 micron

                  FR = Rated flow rate, GPM

                  N10 = Particle size factor

Valve Assemblies                                   6-30                   Revision E
                Table 6-6. Fluid Viscosity/Temperature Multiplying Factor, C
                                                for Typical Fluids

                                                C

FLUID                                   Fluid Temperature, oF

                  -50     0     50      100     150          200     250     300         350

Air             554.0   503.4   462.9   430.1   402.6        379.4   359.5      ---         ---
Oxygen          504.6   457.8   420.6   390.2   365.9        343.6   325.3      ---         ---
Nitrogen        580.0   528.0   486.5   452.6   424.3        400.0   379.6      ---         ---
Carbon Dioxide                                                                  ---         ---
Water              ---     ---    0.7     0.8     0.9          0.9      ---     ---         ---
SAE 10 Oil         ---     ---  6.309   12.15   19.43        27.30      ---     ---         ---
SAE 20 Oil         ---     ---  0.060   0.250   0.750        1.690   2.650   2.861       5.204
SAE 30 Oil         ---     ---  0.0314  0.167   0.492        1.183   2.213   2.861       4.309
SAE 40 Oil         ---     ---  0.0297  0.1129  0.3519       0.8511  1.768   2.221       3.387
SAE 50 Oil         ---     ---  0.0122  0.0534  0.2462       0.6718  1.325   1.657       2.654
SAE 90 Oil         ---     ---  0.0037  0.0326  0.1251       0.3986  0.8509  1.515       2.591
Diesel Fuel        ---     ---  0.0012  0.0189  0.0973       0.3322  0.7855  16.31          ---
MIL-H-83282     0.1617  0.7492  2.089   3.847   6.228        9.169   12.78   0.6114      0.7766
MIL-H-5606      0.0031  0.0432  0.2137  0.6643  1.421        2.585   4.063   3.628       4.880
                0.0188  0.0951  0.2829  0.6228  1.108        1.783   2.719

--- Data for these temperatures determined to be unreliable

                C  = O  
                        

 Where: o = 2 x 10-8 lbf-min/in2
          = Dynamic viscosity of fluid being used, lbf-min/in2

Valve Assemblies                        6-31                                 Revision E
Table 6-7. Friction Coefficient of Typical Materials used in Valve Designs

     Material          Static Friction Coefficient

Steel on steel         C Dry  C Lubricated
Aluminum on steel        0.8         0.5
Copper on steel          0.6         0.5
Brass on steel           0.5         0.4
Cast iron on steel       0.5         0.4
Brass on nylon           0.4         ---
Steel on nylon           0.3         ---
Teflon on Teflon         0.3         ---
Hard carbon on carbon   0.05        0.04
Copper on copper         0.2         0.1
Aluminum on aluminum     1.3         0.8
Nickel on nickel         1.1         ---
Brass on brass           0.7         0.3
                         0.9         0.6

6.6 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 6, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of valve
assemblies.

5. Bauer, P., Glickmon, M., and Iwatsuki, F., "Analytical Techniques for the Design of
      Seals for Use in Rocket Propulsion systems", Volume 1, ITT Research Institute,
      Technical Report AFRPL-TR-65-61 (May 1965)

22. Howell, Glen W. and Terry M. Weathers, Aerospace Fluid Component Designers'
      Handbook, Volumes I and II, TRW Systems Group, Redondo Beach, CA prepared
      for Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, Edwards, CA, Report AD 874 542 and
      Report AD 874 543 (February 1970).

Valve Assemblies       6-32                         Revision E
27. May, K.D., "Advanced Valve Technology", National Aeronautics and Space
      Administration, NASA Report SP-5019 (February 1965)

39. Shigley, J.E., Mischke, C.R., Mechanical Engineering Design, McGraw-Hill Book
      Co., NY, 1989

49. Kuhlmann-Wildorf, D., "Parametric Theory of Adhesive Wear in Uni-Directional
      Sliding", Wear of Materials, pp. 402-413, American Society of Mechanical
      Engineers, New York (1983)

58. Parmley, R.O., Mechanical Components Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY
      1985

83. Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 86th Edition, CRC Press, 2005

117. Jerry L. Lyons, Lyons' Valve Designer's Handbook, Van Nostrand Reinhold
        Company, 1982

Valve Assemblies  6-33  Revision E
                  This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Valve Assemblies  6-34                                Revision E
                       7 CHAPTER

                                                      BEARINGS

7.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     7.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... 1
     7.2 BALL BEARINGS............................................................................................... 2
     7.3 ROLLER BEARINGS ......................................................................................... 3
     7.4 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS ............................................................................ 4

        7.4.1 Bearing Preload........................................................................................... 4
        7.4.2 Internal Clearance ....................................................................................... 4
        7.4.3 Bearing Race Creep.................................................................................... 4
        7.4.4 Bearing Material .......................................................................................... 5
        7.4.5 Bearing Installation and Removal................................................................ 5
     7.5 BEARING FAILURE MODES AND MECHANISMS........................................... 6
     7.6 BEARING FAILURE RATE PREDICTION ......................................................... 8
        7.6.1 Lubricant Multiplying Factor ...................................................................... 12
        7.6.2 Water Contamination Multiplying Factor.................................................... 12
        7.6.3 Temperature Multiplying Factor................................................................. 13
        7.6.4 Service Factor ........................................................................................... 13
        7.6.5 Lubricant Contamination Factor ................................................................ 13
     7.7 REFERENCES ................................................................................................ 19

7.1 INTRODUCTION

     Bearings are used in mechanical designs to achieve a smooth, low-friction rotary
motion or sliding action (linear motion) between two surfaces. Because there are so
many different types of bearings in use for specific applications, it is extremely difficult to
establish a base failure rate for an individual bearing design based on field performance
data. In addition to the problem of locating failure rate data for an individual type of
bearing, bearing analysis is also extremely difficult due to the large number of
engineering parameters related to bearing design such as size, material properties,
rigidity, design complexity, type of lubrication and load capacity.

     Fortunately, bearings are among the few components designed for a finite life.
Because of the fatigue properties of the materials used, some bearings are assigned a
L10 life, which is the number of revolutions at a given load that 90 percent of a set of
apparently identical bearings will complete or exceed before failure. To apply the L10 life

Bearings          7-1  Revision D
to a specific application requires conversion of the "given load" to the equivalent radial
load of the bearing for the intended application. Other factors that need to be identified
in order to correlate the L10 life with the intended operating environment include actual
lubrication properties, misalignment, velocity, type of loading, temperature and
contamination levels. If L10 data for bearing life is available, procedures for estimating
bearing reliability in this chapter utilize the manufacturer's published L10 life with
multiplying factors to determine the failure rate for the intended operating conditions.

     In many instances the manufacturer provides a rated dynamic load for the specific
bearing to be used in the design. This basic dynamic load rating compared to the
projected equivalent radial load for the bearing provides the L10 life for the bearing.
Procedures in this chapter permit the projection of bearing failure rate for either source
of data.

7.2 BALL BEARINGS

     A ball bearing is a type of rolling element bearing that uses balls to maintain the
separation between the moving parts of the bearing. Ball bearings are designed to
reduce rotational friction and to support both radial and axial loads. At least two races
are used in the design to contain the balls and transmit the loading through the balls.
As one of the bearing races rotates, it causes the balls to rotate as well. Because the
balls are rolling they produce very little friction. A typical ball bearing is shown in Figure
7.1

     Ball bearings have a lower load capacity for their size than other kinds of rolling
element bearings due to the smaller contact area between the balls and races.
However, a ball bearing can tolerate some misalignment of the inner and outer races for
higher application reliability and are generally used where there is likely to be excessive
misalignment or shaft deflection.

     Ball bearings are usually classified as radial, thrust or angular contact. As their
names imply, radial bearings are used for radial loads and thrust bearings for thrust
loads. Angular contact bearings combine radial and thrust loads and are used where
precise shaft location is needed. Most ball bearing designs originate from three basic
types:

     (1) Single-row radial - the most widely used ball bearing, a symmetrical unit
capable of absorbing combined radial and thrust loads. It is not intended for pure thrust
loads. Because this type of ball bearing is not self-aligning, accurate alignment
between the shaft and housing bore is required.

     (2) Single-row angular contact - designed for combined radial and thrust loads
where the thrust component may be large and axial deflection must be confined. A high

Bearings  7-2  Revision D
shoulder on one side of the outer ring is provided to take the thrust, and the shoulder on
the other side is sufficiently high to make the bearing non-separable.

     (3) Double-row angular contact - two single-row angular contact bearings built as a
unit with the internal fit between balls and raceway fixed during assembly. These ball
bearings have a known amount of internal preload built in for maximum resistance to
deflection. They are very effective for radial loads where bearing deflection must be
minimized.

          Ball Bearing       Roller Bearing

          Figure 7.1 Typical Bearing Configurations

     All ball bearings have a life which is limited by the fatigue life of the material from
which they are made and as modified by the lubricant used. In rolling contact fatigue,
precise relationships between life, load, and design characteristics are difficult to predict
and, therefore, the statistical L10 life based on a probability of survival is used with
multiplying factors to adjust the L10 life to the actual conditions being projected.

7.3 ROLLER BEARINGS

     Common roller bearings use cylinders of slightly greater length than diameter.
Roller bearings typically have higher load capacity than ball bearings, but a lower
capacity and higher friction under loads perpendicular to the primary supported
direction. If the inner and outer races are misaligned, the bearing capacity often drops
quickly compared to a ball bearing. A typical roller bearing is shown in Figure 7.1.

     Because roller bearings have greater roller surface area in contact with inner and
outer races, they generally support greater loads than comparably sized ball bearings.
Cylindrical roller bearings are used to support pure radial loads. They are often used at

Bearings                7-3                          Revision D
one end of a highly loaded gear shaft with either tapered roller bearings or multiple-row
matched ball bearings at the other end. Roller bearing life is drastically reduced by
excessive misalignment or deflection; hence, when using roller bearings, the stack-up of
tolerances contributing to misalignment and the shaft or housing deflections should be
carefully considered. To compensate for some degree of misalignment or deflection
and to carry heavy radial loads, roller bearings are crowned to prevent the phenomenon
known as end loading. End loading invariably leads to a drastic reduction in bearing
life. The crowning process distributes the load away from the roller ends and prevents
excessive stress that could cause fatigue at the roller bearing ends.

7.4 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

         The following paragraphs in this section describe the various features of bearing
design to be considered in evaluating a mechanical assembly for reliability incorporating
bearings.

7.4.1 Bearing Preload

     Bearing preload is critical for the proper operation of a bearing. A bearing needs to
be fitted with a shaft and there will be some clearance between the different parts of the
bearing. To remove this internal clearance and create an interference fit, a preload is
necessary. The preload provides a sufficient thrust load to push the bearing so that is
secure in the groove and has no axial clearance. This elimination of clearance within
the bearing eliminates vibration and noise of the bearing and also controls the rotational
accuracy of the bearing.

7.4.2 Internal Clearance

     Internal clearance, the clearance between the inner race and the shaft, is an
important consideration in the design of ball and roller bearings, since improper internal
clearance can drastically shorten the life of a bearing. A small internal clearance may
limit the amount of misalignment that can be tolerated and can lead to heavily preloaded
bearings. Excessive internal clearance will cause the load to be carried by too few
rolling elements. The best practice is to ensure that under all conditions there will be a
small positive internal clearance. Usually, the most significant factors to consider when
determining mounted internal clearance of the bearing are the reduction of internal
clearance due to shaft or housing fits and the effect of temperature on the housing/outer
race interface diameters.

7.4.3 Bearing Race Creep

     The creeping or spinning of bearing inner races on gear shafts is a fairly common,
although not usually serious, problem in most drive systems. Lundberg and Palmgren
developed fairly simple parametric calculations for the minimum fit to prevent creep with

Bearings  7-4  Revision D
solid shafts, but there has been little if anything published on minimum press fits for
hollow shafts, as are used in helicopter drive systems. Since an accurate mathematical
solution to such a problem would be extremely difficult, the best approach seems to be
a reliance on past experience. Sometimes it may not be possible to achieve the
necessary press fit to prevent creep without introducing excessively high hoop stress in
the bearing race. A common practice in this case is to use separate anti-rotation
devices with a slotted bearing race. Although this practice is fairly effective with
stationary races, it is seldom effective with rotating races.

7.4.4 Bearing Material

     Because the wear rate of a material is proportional to the load applied to it, and
inversely proportional to its hardness, one obvious way of reducing wear on bearing
components is to increase the hardness at their surface. This is commonly
accomplished by using hard coatings, such as electro-less nickel, hard anodised
aluminum and thin dense chrome. In addition, other hard coatings, such as titanium
carbide, carburising, and both carbo- and plasma nitriding are also widely used.
Another advance in bearing technology has been the development of extremely clean
bearing steels resulting from vacuum-melt processing. Vacuum-melt bearings have
significantly increased the potential life of a bearing by one and one-half to two times
the life of vacuum-degassed bearings. Bearings of such advanced materials as M-50
steel can offer even further improvement. Cost of the bearing is an important
consideration and the application of the bearing considering such factors as loading and
velocity must determine bearing selection.

7.4.5 Bearing Installation and Removal

     The installation of bearings should be carefully considered during design not only to
prevent assembly errors, but also to permit easy removal of the bearing without
damaging it. Lead chamfers are often installed at bearing journals to facilitate
installation. When specifying the breakout on the bearing corners, the shaft drawing
should be checked to ensure that the maximum radius at the shaft shoulder will be
cleared by the bearing. The height of the shaft shoulder should, if possible, be
consistent with that recommended by bearing manufacturers. Where necessary, flats
should be machined on the shaft shoulder so that a bearing puller can remove the
bearing by contacting the inner race. Many bearings have been damaged in the past
where the bearing puller could grab only the cage or rollers of the bearing. Where
duplex bearings are used, the bearings should be marked so that the installer can
readily determine the proper way for the bearings to be installed. Incorrectly installed
duplex bearings will not properly react to the design loads. All bearings that can be
separated should have the serial number clearly shown on all of the separable com-
ponents. This will prevent the inadvertent mixing of components. Every assembly
drawing that contains bearings should clearly explain in the drawing notes how the
bearing should be installed. It is imperative that the mechanics building up this
assembly have this information available.

Bearings  7-5  Revision D
7.5 BEARING FAILURE MODES AND MECHANISMS

     The two main failure modes of a bearing are wear and fatigue. Ball and roller
bearings which are well lubricated , perfectly sealed and running at moderate load and
speed, will not exhibit sufficient wear that will cause a failure even after long service. In
this case the bearing will eventually end its service life due to fatigue. Fatigue is the
failure mode that normally creates the L10 bearing life. The operating conditions found
in practice will almost certainly be less benign and wear must therefore be considered
as a potential failure mode. Wear will be exhibited at the contact surfaces of the rings
and rolling elements, at the sliding surfaces of the cage, and in roller bearings on the lip
and roller faces. The process of wear begins with an increase in surface roughness of
the raceway due to detached material particles. As additional material is removed from
the contact area, the form of the raceway will be altered. Foreign particles may also
enter the bearing through insufficient or worn seals, lubrication contaminants from other
parts in a common lubrication system, or corrosion of the rolling and sliding surfaces
due to water condensation as a result of temperature changes and corrosive liquids.

     Roller bearings usually provide ample warning before complete failure by
increasingly noisy operation and will usually fail from fatigue. Sliding bearings, on the
other hand, often perform well up to moments before a catastrophic failure. It is very
important to evaluate all bearing failure modes since a bearing failure emitting particles
can cause severe shaft damage or other parts associated with the total design.

     Common bearing failure modes, mechanisms and causes are listed in Table 7-1.
One common mechanism of bearing failure is spalling, which is defined as subsurface
chipping or breaking. The failure is usually caused by loading of the bearing exceeding
the design load. Surface fatigue or peeling is a cracking and peeling of the surface
metal. It is usually the result of poor lubrication or surface damage which interrupts the
lubricant film. Scores and scratches are usually caused by hard particles being trapped
in a bearing. This failure mechanism may also be caused by inadequate sealing,
contaminants in the lubricant, or installation damage.

     Smearing is surface damage resulting from unlubricated sliding contact within a
bearing. Brinelling is the actual indentation of a rolling element under excessive load or
impact that causes stresses beyond the yield point of the bearing material.

     Fretting wear is usually caused by an improper fit between the bearing and the shaft
or outer surface of the bearing. This allows movement of the race in relation to the
housing or shaft. The surfaces then wear or score, thereby damaging the surfaces and
preventing a firm, fixed contact.

     Roller and tapered bearings have an additional failure mode defined as scuffing of
the bearing surfaces. This failure mode is usually caused by bearing exposure to an
excessive load for an extended period of time. The surfaces of the moving parts are

Bearings  7-6                             Revision D
scored or scratched, increasing the roughness of the surfaces, setting up stress
concentrations and increasing friction. The scuffing also interferes with the normal
lubricant film and increases the metal-to-metal contact during use.

                   Table 7-1. Typical Modes of Bearing Failure
                                       (Reference 121)

FAILURE MODE       FAILURE MECHANISM                  FAILURE CAUSE

Fatigue damage     - Spalling of ball/roller raceway  - Heavy, prolonged load *
Noisy bearing      - Brinelling                       - Excessive speed
Bearing seizure    - Smearing                         - Shock load
                                                      - Excessive vibration
Bearing vibration  - Surface fatigue
Presence of        - Glazing                          - Loss of lubricant
electric currents  - Microspalling of stressed        - Housing bore out of round
                                                      - Corrosive agents
                     surfaces                         - Distorted bearing seals
                   - Crack formation on rings
                                                      - Inadequate heat removal
                     and balls or rollers               capability
                   - Skidding
                                                      - Loss of lubricant
                   - Scuffing                         - High temperature
                   - Fretting                         - Excessive speed
                   - Pitting of surfaces
                                                      - Misalignment
                   - Pits on raceways and balls,      - Housing bore out of round
                    corrosion                         - Unbalanced/excessive load
                                                      - Inadequate housing support

                                                      - Extensive pitting of surface
                                                       caused by electric current

     * Bearing failure can be caused by excessive shaft bending. See Chapter 20 to
determine shaft deflection in relation to the maximum allowable.

     Fatigue can occur due to cyclic loads normal to the bearing surface. Wiping occurs
from surface to surface contact due to loss of sufficient lubrication film thickness. This
malfunction can occur from under-rotation or from system fluid losses. Overheating is
indicated by metal cracks or surface discoloration. Corrosion is frequently caused by
the chemical reaction between the acids in the lubricants and the base metals in the
bearing.

Bearings           7-7                                          Revision D
     Severe performance requirements may affect the reliability of the bearings if there is
a path of heat conduction from the machine or any friction creating components within it
to the bearings (for example, brakes or clutches). This condition may cause a decrease
in the bearing lubricant's operating viscosity and, consequently, a reduction in bearing
life. A lubricant with a higher temperature rating should prevent leakage or excessive
wear.

7.6 BEARING FAILURE RATE PREDICTION

     Bearing life is usually calculated using the Lundberg-Palmgren method (Reference
53). This method is a statistical technique based on the sub-surface initiation of fatigue
cracks through hardened bearing material. Most mechanical systems are not utilized
precisely as the bearing manufacturer envisioned; therefore, some adjustment factors
must be used to approximate the failure rate of the bearings under specific conditions.

     Less than 10 percent of all bearings last long enough to fail due to normal fatigue
(Reference 8). Most bearings will fail due to static overload, wear, corrosion, lubricant
failure, contamination, or overheating. Experience has shown that the service life of a
bearing is usually limited by either excessive wear or fatigue. Excessive wear occurs
when the bearings are improperly installed or exposed to hostile operating
environments. Inadequate lubrication, misalignment, contamination, shock, vibration, or
extreme temperature all cause bearings to wear out prior to their estimated design life.
In contrast, a bearing can be expected to perform adequately for the duration of its rated
life, given proper operating conditions, until failure occurs due to fatigue.

     Attempting to estimate the fatigue life of an individual bearing is not very practical
because of the large number of design parameters to consider in relation to the
sensitivity of the operating environment. Instead, statistical methods are used to rate
bearings based on the results of large groups of the same type of bearing tested to
failure under controlled laboratory conditions to establish a fatigue life rating. This
rating, known as the L10 life, is defined as the number of hours that 90% of the bearings
operating at their rated load and speed, can be expected to complete or exceed before
exhibiting the first evidence of fatigue. It is important to consider the bearing application
before using the published L10 life as a reliability estimate. For example, a bearing in a
direct drive motor application may have a predicted life of 400,000 hours but the same
bearing in a belt drive or pillow block application may have a life of 40,000 hours
depending on loading.

     Standard equations have been developed to extend the L10 rating to determine the
statistical rated life for any given set of conditions. These equations are based on an
exponential relationship of load to life.

Bearings  7-8  Revision D
                     L10  =    LS   y                                             (7-1)
                               LA   
                                    

where:    L10 = Bearing life with reliability of 90%, millions of revolutions

          LS = Dynamic load rating of bearing, lbf
          LA = Equivalent radial load on bearing, lbf

            y = Constant, 3.0 for ball bearings, 3.3 for roller bearings

     The dynamic load rating is the dynamic load capacity of the bearing that is
established during L10 life testing and can be found in manufacturer's catalogs. The
equivalent radial load is the load the bearing will see in service and can be found in
engineering drawings or calculated. Normally LA will be approximately 0.5 LS depending
on the anticipated environmental and maintenance considerations of the design and can
be used as a value for preliminary reliability estimates.

The L10 life can be converted to hours with the following:

          L10  h  =  106     LS  y                                                (7-2)
                     60n     LA  
                                 

where:    L10 h = Bearing life (at 90% reliability), operating hours

             n = Operating speed, revolutions/ min

     In a ball or roller bearing, the rolling elements transmit the external load from one
ring to the other. The external force load is generally composed of a radial load FR and
an axial load FA and is distributed over a number of rolling elements. These two
components combine to form the equivalent radial load. The equivalent radial load, LA,
is defined as the radial load producing the same theoretical fatigue life as the combined
radial and thrust loads. All bearing loads are converted to an equivalent radial load. If
only pure radial loads are involved, then the value for LA is simply the radial load.

     Except for the special case of pure thrust bearings, bearing ratings shown in
manufacturers' catalogs are for radial loads. When thrust is present, an equivalent
radial load must be determined before estimating reliability. Most bearing manufacturers
provide methods of combining thrust and radial loads in accordance with ANSI

Bearings                         7-9                                  Revision D
standards to obtain an equivalent radial load. This relationship can be written as
follows:

          LA = XFR + YFA                                                             (7-3)

Where:    LA = Equivalent radial load, lbf
          FR = Radial load, lbf
          FA = Axial load, lbf
           X = Radial factor relating to contact angle

           Y = Thrust factor relating to contact angle, thrust load and

                 the number and size of balls or rollers in the bearing

     A bearing catalog will display separate tables of values to cover single-row, double-
row, and angular-contact variations. X and Y can be obtained from the manufacturer of
the bearing. References 44 and 83 provide design equations to calculate radial and
thrust loads, and guidelines for estimating the radial and thrust factors. FA should not
exceed 30% of the radial load, FR.

     Substantial improvements in materials processing and manufacturing techniques
have been made since the original development of the L10 concept for predicting
bearing life. For instance, high-purity steels that are vacuum degassed or vacuum
melted are now widely used for bearings. Also, bearing components are manufactured
to tighter tolerances on geometry, and ball/raceways have finer finishes, which help to
improve lubricating films. For reasons such as these, bearing manufacturers have
modified their L10 ratings with certain adjustment factors.

     Bearing life for an individual bearing or a group of identical bearings operating under
the same conditions is the life associated with 90% reliability. Some bearing
applications may require a consideration of reliability other than 90 percent. Bearings
used in applications such as aircraft engines where safety is an issue, reliability may
need to be above 90%. In a production line conveyer belt application it may be possible
to use the average failure rate (L50). Table 7-2 provides some typical life adjustment
factors to modify the calculated failure rate in Equation (7-4). To be compatible with
other components in a mechanical assembly based on MTBF values, the L50 value
should be used.

     For a specific bearing, a manufacturer may provide a dynamic load rating for
individual bearings. In this case Equation (7-4) is used to determine the bearing failure
rate for the intended operating environment. If the manufacturer provides an L10 life,
that life will be based on testing at rated dynamic loading and 90% reliability. Also, the
L10 life may be known from previous experience. In these situations the failure rate

Bearings  7-10                                                           Revision D
must be adjusted according to the actual dynamic load and Equation (7-5) is used to
determine the bearing failure rate.

          BE = BE,B i CR i C i CCW i Ct i CSF i CC                                 (7-4)

Where:    BE = Failure rate of bearing, failures/million hours

          BE,B = Base failure rate, failures/million hours

          =  1 / L10 h where  L10  h  =  106    LS  y  (Reference Equation (7-2))
                                         60n    LA  
                                                    

          CR = Life adjustment factor for reliability (See Table 7-2)

            C = Multiplying factor for lubricant (See Section 7.6.1 and Figure 7.3)

          CCW = Multiplying factor for water contaminant level (See Section 7.6.2

                    and Figure 7.4)

            Ct = Multiplying factor for operating temperature (See Section 7.6.3

                    and Figure 7.5)

           CSF = Multiplying factor for operating service conditions (See Section
                    7.6.4 and Table 7-3)

            CC = Multiplying factor for lubrication contamination level
                    (See Section 7.6.5 and Table 7-4)

          BE = BE,B i CY i CR i C i CCW i Ct i CSF i CC                            (7-5)

Where:     BE = Failure rate of bearing, failures/million hours
          BE,B = Base failure rate, failures/million hours

                 = 1 / L10 h where L10 h = rated life in hours (90% reliability)
            CY = Multiplying factor for applied load (See Figure 7.2)
            CR = Life adjustment factor for reliability (See Table 7-2)

            C = Multiplying factor for lubricant (See Section 7.6.1 and Figure 7.3)
          CCW = Multiplying factor for water contaminant level (See Section 7.6.2

                    and Figure 7.4)

            Ct = Multiplying factor for operating temperature (See Section 7.6.3

                    and Figure 7.5)

Bearings                                 7-11                          Revision D
                CSF = Multiplying factor for operating service conditions (See Section
                          7.6.4 and Table 7-3)

                 CC = Multiplying factor for lubrication contamination level
                          (See Section 7.6.5 and Table 7-4)

    The applied load will often be obtained from the bearing application such as the side
loading of an actuator.

7.6.1 Lubricant Multiplying Factor

     The lubricant factor, C, is a function of the viscosity of the lubricant used in the
bearing system at the intended operating temperature. C can be expressed as:

          C  =                      O  0.54                                 (7-6)
                                    L  
                                       

Where:    O = Viscosity of specification lubricant, lb-min/in2
          L = Viscosity of lubricant used, lb-min/in2

     Multiplying factors for the effect of lubrication viscosity on the failure rate of a
bearing are shown in Figure 7.2.

7.6.2 Water Contamination Multiplying Factor

     Water contamination can have a detrimental effect on fatigue life. A water
contamination multiplying factor which accounts for the reduction in fatigue life due to
the leakage of water into the oil lubrication is shown in Figure 7.4. This factor is
represented as CCW and is represented by the following equations derived from data in
Reference 19.

          CCW = 1.0 + 25.50CW - 16.25 CW 2                                  (7-7)

Where: CW = Percentage of water in the lubricant

    The CCW multiplying factor will modify the base failure rate as shown in Equation (7-

4) or (7-5). For bearings designed for water based lubricants CW = 0 and CCW = 1.00

Bearings                               7-12                     Revision D
7.6.3 Temperature Multiplying Factor

     Excessive wear of a bearing is caused by exposure to hostile environments
including extreme temperature. Excessive bearing heat can be generated by
overloading the bearing. Heat will cause a decrease in the viscosity of the lubricant,
causing more heat as it loses its ability to support the load. In addition, any residue on
the bearing parts will harden at the elevated temperature destroying the ability of the
grease or oil to lubricate the bearing. It will also introduce solid particles into the
lubricant. Figure 7.5 provides a failure rate multiplying factor for bearing temperature.

7.6.4 Service Factor

     The actual radial or axial load on the bearing may be greater than the calculated
load because of vibration and shock present during operation of the equipment. A
service factor can be used to adjust the failure rate for various operating conditions as
shown in Table 7-3.

7.6.5 Lubricant Contamination Factor

     The quality of the total equipment filtration system has a definite influence on
bearing life. Hard particles in the system can induce permanent indentations, damaging
the smooth surfaces of the bearing components. These rough surfaces then produce
higher contact stresses resulting in shorter bearing life. Table 7-4 provides failure rate
multiplying factors for the effect of lubricant contamination.

Bearings  7-13  Revision D
10.00

Applied Load Multiplying Factor, Cy1.00                    Ball
                                   0.10                    Bearings
                                   0.01
                                                              Roller
                                                              Bearings

                                   0.00

                                         0.0         0.2      0.4       0.6   0.8     1.0              1.2  1.4

                                                                             LA / LS

                                              Cy  =    LA  y
                                                       LS  
                                                           

Where:                                            LA = Equivalent radial load, lbf
                                                  LS = Dynamic load rating, lbf
                                                   y = 3.0 for ball bearings, 3.3 for roller bearings

                                                       Figure 7.2 Multiplying Factor for Applied Load

Bearings                                                                7-14                                Revision D
Lubricant Multiplying Factor, C1.6
                               1.4
                               1.2
                               1.0
                               0.8
                               0.6
                               0.4
                               0.2

                                   0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0

                                                                   O / L

                                 C  =    O  0.54
                                         L  
                                            

Where:                            = Viscosity of specification fluid
                                 L = Viscosity of lubricant used

                                    Figure 7.3 Multiplying Factor for Bearing Lubricant

Bearings                                          7-15                                   Revision D
Water Contamination Multiplying Factor, C CW  12.0
                                              11.0
                                              10.0

                                               9.0
                                               8.0
                                               7.0
                                               6.0
                                               5.0
                                               4.0
                                               3.0
                                               2.0
                                               1.0

                                                    0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                                                             Water Content of Lubricant, CW, Percent

 For CW  0.8, CCW = 1.0 + 25.50CW - 16.25 CW 2

 For CW > 0.8, CCW = 11.00

Where: CW = Percentage of water in the lubricant

                                              Figure 7.4 Water Contamination Multiplying Factor

Bearings                                      7-16                                               Revision D
                                     3.0

Temperature Multiplying Factor, C t  2.5

                                     2.0

                                     1.5

                                     1.0

                                     0.5           80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260
                                         60                         Operating Temperature, T O , Degrees C

                                          Ct = 1.0 for TO < 183oC

                                          Ct  =    TO   3  for  TO   183oC
                                                   183  

Where: TO = Operating Temperature of the Bearing

                                              Figure 7.5 Operating Temperature Multiplying Factor

Bearings                                                            7-17    Revision D
          Table 7-2. Life Adjustment Factor for Reliability, CR

          Reliability R  La                      Life adjustment
                 %                                  factor CR *

          90             L10                            1.00

          95             L5                             1.62

          96             L4                             1.88

          97             L3                             2.29

          98             L2                             3.01

          99             L1                             4.79

          50             L50                            0.29

                         * CR =           0.223

                                      ln    100    2/3
                                             R   

          Table 7-3. Bearing Service Factors
                   (References 57 & 119)

            Type of Application                Service Factor, CSF
                                      Ball Bearing Roller Bearing
Uniform and steady load, free from
shock                                            1.0              1.0
Normal operation, light shock load
Moderate shock load                              1.5              1.0
Heavy shock load
Extreme and indeterminate shock load             2.0              1.3
Precision gearing
Commercial gearing                               2.5              1.7
Toothed belts
Vee belts                                        3.0              2.0
Flat belts
                                                 1.2

                                                 1.3

                                                                  1.2

                                                                  1.8

                                                                  3.0

Bearings                              7-18                             Revision D
                         Table 7-4. Bearing Contamination Level
                                          (Reference 112)

                                                Service Factor, CC

Contamination Condition                   Bearing diameter  Bearing diameter
                                               < 100 mm          > 100 mm

Extreme cleanliness- particle size

approx. lubricant film thickness                1.0              1.0

(laboratory conditions)

High cleanliness ­ oil filtered through         1.4              1.2
fine filter  10 micron

Normal cleanliness ­ slight                     1.8              1.4
contamination in lubricant

Slight contamination ­slight

contamination in lubricant ­ hard               2.5              2.0

particles > 10 micron

Severe contamination ­ course filtering,        5.0              3.3
no integral seals

7.7 REFERENCES

      In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 7, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of
bearings.

8. Block, H. and D. Johnson, "Downtime Prompts Upgrading of Centrifugal Pumps",
       Chemical Engineering Magazine, pp. 35-38 (25 Nov 1985)

19. Hindhede, U., et al, Machine Design Fundamentals, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1983

44. Sibley, L.B., "Rolling Bearings", Wear Control Handbook, M.B. Peterson and W.
       O. Winer, Eds., Sect. 5, pp 699-726, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
       New York (1980)

50. Bentley, R.M. and D.J. Duquette, Environmental Considerations in Wear
       Processes, "Fundamentals of Friction and Wear of Materials", pp. 291-329,
       American Society of Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1981)

Bearings                                  7-19                        Revision D
53. Rumbarger, John H., "A Fatigue Life and reliability Model for Gears", American
       Gear Manufacturers Association Report 229.16 (January 1972)

57. Deutschman, A.D., et al, Machine Design; Theory and Practice, MacMillan
       Publishing Co, NY, 1975

58. Parmley, R.O., Mechanical Components Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY
       1985

83. "Ball and Roller Bearings, Theory, Design and Application", John Wiley & Sons,
       ISBN 0 471 26283 8

112. NSK Product Guide ­ Bearings 2008, NSK Americas, Inc.

116. Dr. Gerhard G. Antony, "How to Determine the MTBF of Gearboxes", Power
       Transmission Engineering, April 2008

119. Jack A. Collins, Henry Busby and George Stabb, Mechanical Design of Machine
       Elements and Machines, the Ohio State University, John Wiley & Sons, 2010

120. Tyler G. Hicks, Handbook of Mechanical Engineering Calculations, McGraw-Hill,
        2006

121. Oil Analysis, NAEC-92-153, Naval Air Engineering Center, Lakehurst, NJ
       23 August 1982

122. "How dirt and Water Slash Bearing Life", Richard C. Beercheck, Machine Design,
        July 6, 1978

131. "Tidal Current Turbine Reliability: Power Take-off Train Models and Evaluation,
       C. Iliev and D. Val, Third International Conference on Ocean Energy, October
       2010

Bearings  7-20  Revision D
                        8 CHAPTER

                                      GEARS AND SPLINES

8.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     8.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... 1
     8.2 GEAR DESIGNS................................................................................................ 2
     8.3 GEAR AND SPLINE FAILURE MODES ............................................................ 6

        8.3.1 Wear............................................................................................................ 6
        8.3.2 Surface Fatigue ........................................................................................... 6
        8.3.3 Plastic Flow ................................................................................................. 7
        8.3.4 Breakage ..................................................................................................... 8
     8.4 GEAR RELIABILITY PREDICTION ................................................................... 8
        8.4.1 Velocity Multiplying Factor........................................................................... 9
        8.4.2 Gear Loading Multiplying Factor.................................................................. 9
        8.4.3 Misalignment Multiplying Factor ................................................................ 10
        8.4.4 Lubricant Multiplying Factor ...................................................................... 11
        8.4.5 Temperature Multiplying Factor................................................................. 11
        8.4.6 AGMA Multiplying Factor........................................................................... 12
     8.5 SPLINE RELIABILITY PREDICTION............................................................... 12
     8.6 REFERENCES ................................................................................................ 19

8.1 INTRODUCTION

     The reliability of a gear along with the other gearbox components is an extremely
important consideration in the design of any power-transmission system, ensuring that
the required loads can be handled over the intended life of the system. Some general
design constraints and requirements need to be given special attention because of their
potential impact on the long-term reliability of the total system. One is the operating
power spectrum and determining the potential requirements for growth. Another is that
changing requirements may cause a configuration change where a misalignment could
cause vibration that could set up stresses and lead to fatigue failure. Another example
is the lubrication system if included as part of the gearbox design, assuring that the
lubrication capacity and filtration system is adequate considering the operating
environment of the total system. The lubricant flow should be designed so that the
particles within the filtration system are removed prior to reentry into the gearbox area.

Gears and Splines  8-1  Revision A
     Noise and vibration can affect reliability, not only of the gearbox itself, but also of
associated components within the complete power-transmission system. Hence, every
effort should be made to configure a gearbox that is as quiet and as vibration-free as
possible. The design analysis should also include the assurance that critical speeds
and gear clash resonance frequencies, which may reinforce each other, are avoided.

     In most gearbox applications, especially in airborne systems, weight is usually a
constraining and, in some cases, the controlling factor. In general, overdesign means
higher reliability, but in weight critical systems, overdesign in one area requires
underdesign elsewhere; thereby, defeating the purpose of the overdesign. For
example, bearing life should never be sacrificed in the design because bearings are
likely to be the main drivers in determining gear system reliability.

     When a gearbox is exposed to overstress, several conditions occur that greatly
affect the failure rate. For example, bolted gear flanges will be subject to fretting and
high loads will cause bevel gears to shift patterns, making tooth breakage a likely
occurrence. And spur gears can develop scuffing lines increasing the roughness of the
surface as loads are increased. A thorough reliability analysis includes a detailed
analysis of the impact on each part or component and the assurance that the gear
system used in a system does not exceed the specification load.

8.2 GEAR DESIGNS

     The involute gear profile is the most commonly used system for gearing. In an
involute gear, the profiles of the teeth are involutes of a circle (contour of gear teeth
curves inward). A very common gear design is the spur gear. Spur gears are
cylindrical in form and operate on parallel axes with the teeth straight and parallel to the
axes. A typical spur gear arrangement is shown in Figure 8.1. In general, the reliability
of drive train spur gears is extremely high due to present design standards. There are,
however, some considerations that should be addressed because in evaluating the
reliability of a gear for specific purposes.

     The initial design of the spur gear mesh is normally one of standard proportions and
equal tooth thickness for both pinion and gear. This initial design is then altered to
achieve an optimum configuration to achieve recess action and a balanced bending
stress in pinion and gear. A recess-action gear mesh, shown in Figure 8.2, has a long
addendum pinion and short addendum gear. A recess-action mesh is quieter and
smoother running than standard mesh and has a much lower tendency to score due to
better lubrication within the mesh.

     Although the advantage of having balanced bending stresses on a pinion and gear
is primarily lower weight, it does have an indirect effect on reliability. As stated earlier,
whenever there is an inefficient use of weight, reliability is compromised somewhat. For
example, even a fraction of a pound saved in the optimization of a spur gear mesh
could be applied to a bearing where the life could perhaps be doubled. While

Gears and Splines  8-2  Revision A
overemphasis of weight reduction can be detrimental to reliability, the carrying of excess
weight can have a far-reaching effect; therefore, a balanced gear system must be the
goal for efficient and reliable systems. Fortunately, it is usually a simple task to achieve
recess-action and balanced bending stress in most spur gear designs. This is
accomplished by experimentally shifting the length of contact up the line of action
toward the driver gear, while increasing the circular tooth thickness of the pinion and
decreasing that of the gear.

                   Figure 8.1 Typical Spur Gear Arrangement

Gears and Splines  Figure 8.2 Gear Mesh Arrangements         Revision A
                                         8-3
     An important parameter to evaluate lubrication effectiveness is the lubricant film
thickness. The equation below is a non-dimensional expression for lubricant film
thickness:

                   HL  =  2.65 G0.54   U 0.7                             (8-1)
                               W 0.13

Where:             HL = Dimensionless film thickness factor
                   G = Viscosity and material parameter
                   U = Speed parameter
                   W = Load parameter

     Since it is often difficult to obtain these parameters directly, this expression will only
be used for a qualitative evaluation. The major impact of the formula is to establish the
dependence of lubricant film thickness (HL) from the various parameters.

     To ensure smooth operation of the gear mesh under load, it is generally the practice
to modify the involute profile, usually with tip relief, to correct for the deflection of the
gear tooth under load. The various parameters affecting gear wear are shown in Figure
8.3. Too little tip relief will result in the gear teeth going into mesh early and going out of
mesh late. This condition results in higher dynamic loads with the accompanying
stress, vibration, noise and possible non-involute contact that can lead to hard-lines,
scuffing or scoring of gear teeth. Too much tip relief lowers the contact ratio of the gear
set and again can result in less than optimum performance with respect to stress,
vibration, and noise.

                   Figure 8.3 Typical Gear Tooth Designs

     Crowning is generally applied to spur gears to ensure full contact across the face of
the gear without end loading. With insufficient crowning, end loading will occur and
result in higher than predicted vibrational stresses.

Gears and Splines         8-4                                Revision A
     Helical gears, shown in Figure 8.4, are usually quieter and have a greater load-
carrying capacity per inch of face than spur gears. The major disadvantage is that a
thrust load is introduced along the gear shaft, thereby requiring larger and stronger
bearings. Analysis of helical gears is very similar to that used for spur gears. The
stress analysis is performed using an equivalent spur tooth. AGMA standard
procedures have been developed for strength analysis of spur and helical gears.

     Spline gears are used to transfer torque between shafts and flanges, gears and
shafts, and shafts and shafts. A typical spline arrangement is shown in Figure 8.4. A
splined shaft usually has equally spaced teeth around the circumference, which are
most often parallel to the shaft's axis of rotation. These teeth can be straight sided, an
involute form or included angle form (serrations). The teeth on a straight sided spline
have an equal tooth thickness at any point measured radially out from the axis of
rotation. Conversely, the internal parallel spline keys are integral to the shaft and
equally spaced around the circumference. The involute spline has equally spaced teeth
but they have an involute form like a gear tooth. The teeth do not have the same
proportions as a gear tooth. They are shorter in height to provide greater strength.
Involute splines provide a more smooth transition through a radius as opposed to
straight sided splines decreasing the possibility of fatigue cracks. Involute splines are
usually crowned. The serration type of spline has a tooth that is non-involute. The male
teeth are in the form of an included angle, with the female serration having spaces of
the same included angle. Serrations are generally used on smaller diameter shafts
where the included angle form permits more teeth to be used on a smaller
circumference, providing a greater contact area.

     The most common problem associated with splines is wear due to fretting;
particularly, with loose splines. It is important that the reliability analysis confirms that
the bearing stress is below the allowable limit. Tight splines should have an adequate
length pilot to react with bending loads. Lubrication is a particular factor in the reliability
of loose splines and, if at all possible, should remain flooded with oil at all times.
Crowning is usually required to prevent excessive wear.

O.D. I.D.                                                   I.D.                                                                     O.D.
                                          L                                                                                    L1 = Inside Spline Length
                                                                                    L1                                         L2 = Outside Spline Length
     Gears and Splines                                                                                                     L2  L3 = Total Spline Length

                                                                                                         L3                       Revision A

                                             Figure 8.4 Typical Spline Gears

                                                               8-5
8.3 GEAR AND SPLINE FAILURE MODES

     The definition of failure for a gear or spline is not very precise because of the
wearing pattern of the gear. During the initial period of operation, minor imperfections in
the gear will be smoothed out, and the working surfaces will polish up, provided that
proper conditions of installation, lubrication and application are being met. Under
continued normal conditions of operation, the rate of wear will be negligible. A gear has
failed when it can no longer "efficiently" perform the job for which it was designed. Thus
the definition of failure may be determined by the amount of vibration, noise, or results
of a physical inspection.

     The more common modes of gear and spline failure are wear, surface fatigue,
plastic flow and breakage. The following paragraphs describe each of these failure
modes. Table 8-1 provides a summary of possible failure modes for gears and splines.
In the shear mode, the gear immediately ceases to transmit power while in the wear
mode it degrades gradually before complete failure

8.3.1 Wear

     Wear is the removal of metal, worn away normally in a uniform manner from the
contacting surface of the gear teeth. The first stage of wear is the polishing phase
during wear-in of the gear when asperities of the contacting surfaces are gradually worn
off until very fine, smooth surfaces develop. Moderate wear of the gear occurs during
its design life. Excessive wear occurs when the gear is operating in or near the
boundary lubrication regime where the load is being carried by surface asperities rather
than by the lubricant. Excessive wear is similar to moderate wear but the gear teeth are
experiencing a considerable amount of material being removed from the surfaces.
Contamination in the lubrication system can accelerate this wear. During this phase the
tooth-surface profile is being destroyed so that high dynamic loads are encountered
which in turn accelerates the wear rate until the gear is no longer usable.

     Specific types of gear wear include abrasive wear caused by an accumulation of
abrasive particles in the lubrication; corrosive wear caused by water or additives in the
lubricating oil resulting in a deterioration of the gear surface from chemical action; and
scoring caused by failure of the lubricant film due to overheating resulting in metal-to-
metal contact and alternate welding and tearing of the surface metal.

8.3.2 Surface Fatigue

     Surface fatigue is the failure of gear material as a result of repeated surface or
subsurface stresses that are beyond the endurance limit of the material. Surface
fatigue results in removal of metal and the formation of cavities. This pitting can be
caused by the gear surfaces not properly conforming to each other due to lack of proper
alignment. Spalling is similar to pitting except that the pits are larger, shallower and

Gears and Splines      8-6  Revision A
very irregular in shape. Spalling is usually caused by excessively high contact stress
levels. The edges of the initial pits break away and large irregular voids are formed.

                       Table 8-1. Gear Failure Modes

    FAILURE MODE             FAILURE CAUSE                FAILURE EFFECT
Pitting                Cyclic contact stress     Tooth surface damage
                       transmitted through
Root fillet cracking;  lubrication film          Surface contact fatigue and
Tooth end cracks                                 tooth failure
Tooth shear            Tooth bending fatigue
Scuffing                                         Tooth failure
                       Fracture                  Wear and eventual tooth failure
Plastic deformation    Lubrication breakdown     Surface damage resulting in
                       Loading and surface       vibration, noise and eventual
Spalling               yielding                  failure
                                                 Mating surface deterioration,
Tooth bending fatigue  Fatigue                   welding, galling, eventual tooth
Contact fatigue                                  failure
Thermal fatigue        Surface contact fatigue   Tooth failure
Abrasive wear          Surface contact fatigue   Tooth failure
                       Incorrect heat treatment  Tooth failure
                       Contaminants in the gear  Tooth scoring, eventual gear
                       mesh area or lubrication  vibration, noise
                       system

8.3.3 Plastic Flow

     Plastic flow is the cold working of the tooth surfaces, caused by heavy loads and the
rolling and sliding action of the gear mesh. The result of these high contact stress
levels is the yielding of the surface and subsurface material and surface deformation.
This same failure mode in a slow speed operation combined with an inadequate
lubricating film can result in a rippled surface. The cold working action of the gear
surface leads to deteriorated gear box operation.

Gears and Splines      8-7                            Revision A
8.3.4 Breakage

     Breakage is a failure caused by the fracture of a whole tooth or a substantial portion
of a tooth. Gear overload or cyclic stressing of the gear tooth at the root beyond the
endurance limit of the material causes bending fatigue and eventually a crack
originating in the root section of the gear tooth and then the tearing away of the tooth or
part of the tooth. Gear overload can be caused by a bearing seizure or sudden
misalignment of a failed bearing, system dynamic loading, or contaminants entering the
mesh area. Stress risers can sometimes subject the gear to higher root stress levels
than originally predicted. These stress risers include such abnormalities as notches in
the root fillet and small cracks from the heat treating or grinding process.

8.4 GEAR RELIABILITY PREDICTION

     The previous paragraphs have provided an insight into the specific characteristics
and failure modes of the more common gear types. Gears, fortunately, are designed to
a specification and through the standardization of the American Gear Manufacturer's
Association (AGMA), gears of various manufacturers and designs can be compared.
The best approach for the calculation of failure rates for a gear system is to use the
manufacturer's specification for each gear as the base failure rate, and adjust the failure
rate for any difference in the actual usage from that purpose for which the gear was
designed. If the manufacturer's failure rate is not available, a gear or spline is usually
designed for a life of 100 million revolutions for the particular application, the application
including such factors as operating speed, temperature, lubrication and torque. Either
way, the gear failure rate can be expressed as:

                   G = G,B i CGS i CGP i CGA i CGL i CGT i CGV              (8-2)

Where:    G = Failure rate of gear under specific operation, failures/million

                   operating hours

         G,BB = Base failure rate of gear, failures/million operating hours *

        CGS = Multiplying factor considering speed deviation with respect to

                   design (See Section 8.4.1 and Figure 8.6)

        CGP = Multiplying factor considering actual gear loading with respect

                   to design (See Section 8.4.2 and Figure 8.7)

        CGA = Multiplying factor considering misalignment (See Section 8.4.3

                    and Figure 8.8)

        CGL = Multiplying factor considering lubrication deviation with respect

                   to design (See Section 8.4.4 and Figure 8.9)

Gears and Splines                8-8                            Revision A
        CGT = Multiplying factor considering the operating temperature

                  (See Section 8.4.5 and Figure 8-10)

        CGV = Multiplying factor considering the AGMA Service Factor

                  (See Section 8.4.6 and Table 8-1)

     G,B can usually be obtained from the manufacturer and it will be expressed in

failures/operating hour at a specified speed, load, lubricant, and temperature. Also, a
service factor will usually be provided to adjust the normal usage factor for certain
specific conditions found in typical industries. These factors include such things as
vibration, shock and contaminates. Failure data for similar equipment may also be
available or a base failure rate of one failure/108 revolutions can be used:

    [G,B = (RPM x 60) x 1 / design life (revolutions)]

     .

8.4.1 Velocity Multiplying Factor

    The speed deviation multiplying factor, CGS, can be calculated using the relationship

established in Equation (8-1) noting that the lubrication film thickness varies with speed

to the 0.7 power. Therefore:

                            CGS    =k  +    Vo  0.7                                  (8-3)
                                                
                                           Vd   

Where:  Vo = Operating Speed, RPM
        Vd = Design Speed, RPM
         k = Constant, 1.0

See Figure 8.6

8.4.2 Gear Loading Multiplying Factor

        The gear loading multiplying factor, CGP, has a lubricant and a fatigue impact.

From Equation (8-1), the impact of load or torque can be expressed as:

Change in expected life  =    k     =       k        (lubricant impact)              (8-4)
                            W 0.13
                                          LO  0.13
                                          LD  
                                              

Gears and Splines                      8-9                               Revision A
Where:              W = Load Parameter
                   LO = Operating Load, lbs
                   LD = Design Load, lbs
                    k = Constant

and the expression for torque or load on the fatigue rate of the component is:

        Change in expected life  =  k        LD   4.56  (fatigue impact)              (8-5)
                                             LO  
                                                 

Combining Equations (8-4) and (8-5):

                   CGP  =    LO / LD      4.69                                        (8-6)
                                k        

Where:             k = Constant, 0.50

See Figure 8.7

8.4.3 Misalignment Multiplying Factor

     The alignment of gears, bearings and shafts can be critical in the operation of a

system. CGA, the misalignment factor, can be expressed as:

                               AE        2.36
                             0.006     
                   CGA  =                                                             (8-7)

Where: AE = Misalignment angle in radians

See Figure 8.8

Gears and Splines                            8-10                         Revision A
8.4.4 Lubricant Multiplying Factor

    The lubricant factor CGL is a function of the viscosity of the lubricant used in a gear
system. CGL can be expressed as:

                                        0.54
                                      
                      CGL  =       O                                                 (8-8)
                                   L

Where:             O = Viscosity of specification lubricant, lb-min/in2
                   L = Viscosity of lubricant used, lb-min/in2

See Figure 8.9

8.4.5 Temperature Multiplying Factor

     Temperature conditions of the gear system have an impact on other parameters

such as CGL and CGP. As the temperature increases, the lubricant viscosity decreases

and the dimensions of the gears, shafts and bearings increase. This change normally
causes a closer tolerance between operating units and an increase in the frictional
losses in the system. To compensate for the decline in static and dynamic strengths,

creep, and thermal expansion at high temperatures, the temperature factor, CGT,

represented by Equation (8-9) is applicable for temperatures greater than 160oF

(Reference 19). The multiplying factor for temperature CGT can be expressed as:

        CGT        =  460 + TAT  for TAT > 160OF                                     (8-9)
                         620

   and: CGT = 1.0 for TAT  160O F

Where: TAT = Operating temperature, oF

See Figure 8.10

Gears and Splines                             8-11                       Revision A
8.4.6 AGMA Multiplying Factor

     The AGMA has developed service factors for most industrial applications of gears,
bearings, and gearbox designs whereby the expected extent of usage in vibration and
shock environments can be taken into account when a gear system is selected for use.
This service factor can be used as a multiplying factor for determining the inherent

reliability or expected failure rate (CGV) for a specific gearbox or bearing in a particular

environment. Most manufacturers provide service factor data for each of their products.
An example of a service factor for a speed-decreasing drive is shown in Table 8-1.

                        CGV = AGMA Service Factor                                (8-10)

8.5 SPLINE RELIABILITY PREDICTION

     The failure rate in failures per million revolutions of spline gears can be calculated
by:

                                               10  6
                                                
                               GS ,B      =                                      (8-11)

where:  GS = Failure rate of spline gear in failures/million revolutions
           = Life of spline gear in revolutions

       An analytical expression for the spline gear life, , has been devised by

Canterbury and Lowther (Reference 11). This equation is expressed as:

                     =  7.08  x 10 -10     GL   4.56  (  AE  )-2.36              (8-12)
                                               
                                           GD  

Where:             GL = Spline length, in
                   GD = Spline diameter, in
                   AE = Misalignment angle, radians

                    = Load Factor = 4.85 x103GB (GD ) 3

                                                     GT

        GT = Torque, in-lbs

Gears and Splines                              8-12                  Revision A
GBB = Tooth hardness (Brinell), lbs/in2

      Substituting the expression for the spline gear base failure rate into Equation (8-11)
yields:

                   GS = GS,B i CGS i CGL i CGT i CGV              (8-13)

where CGS, CGL, CGT, and GGV are calculated by Equations (8-3), (8-8), (8-9), and (8-

10) respectively.

Gears and Splines  8-13                               Revision A
                                       2.4

                                       2.2

Gear Velocity Multiplying Factor, CGS  2.0

                                       1.8

                                       1.6

                                       1.4

                                       1.2

                                       1.0

                                            0.0       0.2         0.4       0.6        0.8  1.0  1.2    1.4

                                                                                 Vo / Vd

                                                 CGS  = 1.0  +    Vo   0.7
                                                                  Vd  
                                                                      

Where:                                           VO = Operating speed, RPM
                                                 Vd = Design speed, RPM

                                                           Figure 8.6 Gear Velocity Multiplying Factor

Gears and Splines                                                                8-14                   Revision A
Gear Load Multiplying Factor, CGP      100
                                        10

                                          1
                                        0.1
                                      0.01

                                    0.001
                                   0.0001

                                            0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3

                                                                                      L O /LD

                                             LO / LD    4.69
                                                      
                                   CGP  =      0.5

Where:                             LO = Operating load, lbs
                                   LD = Design load, lbs

Gears and Splines                            Figure 8.7 Gear Load Multiplying Factor  Revision A
                                                                     8-15
                                       100.0

Misalignment Multiplying Factor, C GA  10.0

                                       1.0
                                           0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
                                                                        Misalignment Angle, A E , Degrees

                                              CGA = 12.44 AE 2.36

Where:                                        AE = Misalignment angle, degrees

                                              Figure 8.8 Gear Misalignment Multiplying Factor

Gears and Splines                                                  8-16                        Revision A
Lubricant Multiplying Factor, C GL  1.6
                                    1.4
                                    1.2
                                    1.0
                                    0.8
                                    0.6
                                    0.4
                                    0.2

                                        0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0

                                                                      O /L

CGL  =                                  O   0.54
                                        L  
                                           

Where:                                      = Viscosity of specification fluid
                                           L = Viscosity of lubricant used

                                                  Figure 8.9 Gear Lubricant Multiplying Factor

Gears and Splines                                 8-17                                          Revision A
Temperature Multiplying Factor, C GT  2.0

                                      1.8

                                      1.6
                                      1.4

                                      1.2
                                      1.0

                                      0.8
                                                -50 0 50 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
                                                                          Operating Temperature, TAT oF

CGT  =                                460 + TAT  for TAT > 160OF
                                         620

and:

CGT = 1.0 for TAT  160O F

Where: TAT = Operating temperature, oF

                                                 Figure 8.10 Temperature Multiplying Factor

Gears and Splines                                                 8-18                       Revision A
                   Table 8-1. Typical AGMA Service Factor, CGV

                         Character of Load on Driven Member

   Prime Mover     Uniform        Medium Shock                  Heavy Shock

Uniform            1.00           1.25                          1.75
Medium Shock
Heavy Shock        1.25           1.50                          2.00

                   1.50           1.75                          2.25

8.6 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 8, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of gears
and splines.

10. "Boston Gear Catalogue", Catalogue 100, INCOM International Inc., Quincy,
       Massachusetts

11. Canterbury, Jack, and James D. Lowther, "Application of Dimensional Analysis to
      the Prediction of Mechanical Reliability," Naval Weapons Support Activity,
      Washington Navy Yard, Wash., D.C., Report ADAD35295 (September 1976).

13. Cormier, K.R., "Helicopter Drive System R&M Design Guide", United Technologies
      Corp., Stanford, Connecticut, Report ADAD69835 (April 1979)

19. Hindhede, U., et al, "Machine Design Fundamentals", John Wiley & Sons, NY,
      1983

53 Rumbarger, John H., "A Fatigue Life and Reliability Model for Gears", American
      Gear Manufacturers Association, Report 229.16 (January 1972)

54. AGMA Standard for Surface Durability Formulas for Spiral Bevel Gear Teeth,
       American Gear Manufacturers Association, Report 216.01 (January 1964)

55. AGMA Standard Nomenclature of Gear Tooth Failure Modes, American Gear
       Manufacturers Association Report 110.04 (August 1980)

Gears and Splines           8-19                                Revision A
58. Parmley, R.O., Mechanical Components Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY
      1985

70. "Validation of Gearbox Reliability Models from Test Data", Eagle Technology, Inc.,
      Report No. 87-D-0075 (October 1987)

71. Dennis N. Pratt, "Investigation of Spline Coupling Wear", Report No. SY-51R-87,
      Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, MD (December 1987)

98. Raymond J. Drago, "Rating the Load Capacity of Involute Splines", Machine
       Design, February 12, 1976

99. David L. McCarthy, "A Better Way to Rate Gears", Machine Design,
       March 7, 1996

102. Dan Seger, Niagara Gear Corporation, "Inside Splines" , Gear Solutions, January
       2005

103. Mechanical Designers' Workbook, "Gearing", J. Shigley and C. Mischke,
        McGraw-Hill 1986

104. Raymond J. Drago, "Fundamentals of Gear Design", Butterworth Publishers, 1988

Gears and Splines  8-20  Revision A
                9 CHAPTER

                ACTUATORS

9.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     9.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... 1
        9.1.1 Linear Motion Actuators .............................................................................. 1
        9.1.2 Rotary Motion Actuators.............................................................................. 2

     9.2 ACTUATOR FAILURE MODES ......................................................................... 3
     9.3 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR ACTUATOR ...................................................... 4

        9.3.1 Base Failure Rate for Actuator .................................................................... 5
        9.3.2 Contaminant Multiplying Factor ................................................................. 11
        9.3.3 Temperature Multiplying Factor................................................................. 14
     9.4 REFERENCES ................................................................................................ 18

9.1 INTRODUCTION

     Actuators provide the means to apply mechanical power to systems when and
where it is needed. In general, actuators take energy from pumped fluid and convert it
to useful work. This conversion is accomplished by using pumped fluids under pressure
to generate a differential pressure across a piston, which results in a force and motion
being generated. This chapter identifies the more common failure modes and failure
causes of actuators, and develops a procedure for determining the failure rate model of
an actuator in its intended operating environment.

     An actuator typically includes a piston and cylinder, return spring, seals and fluid
connectors. Chapter 15 of this Handbook includes procedures for estimating the failure
rate of a cylinder. Chapter 4 contains procedures for evaluating spring reliability, Refer
to Chapter 3 for seals and Chapter 23 for connectors. Some actuators may include a
valve assembly. If so, see Chapter 6.

     In general, there are two types of output motions generated by actuators: linear and
rotary. Within these two classifications there are many different types of actuator
assemblies as discussed in the following two sections.

9.1.1 Linear Motion Actuators

     Linear motion actuators are usually a derivative of one of the following four types:

Actuators  9-1  Revision C
                  1. Single acting
                  2. Double acting
                  3. Ram
                  4. Telescoping

     Single acting actuators are the simplest type of the four. Pressurized fluid acts only
on one side of the piston so the single acting actuator is capable of generating motion
and power only in one direction and requires an external force to move the piston in the
opposite direction.

     Double acting actuators have fluid chambers on both sides of the piston, which
allows pressurized fluid to both extend and retract the piston/rod and provide a faster
response. Double acting actuators may have rods extending from either or both ends of
the cylinders. Those with rods extending from both ends are balanced; that is, the
piston moves at the same rate and delivers equal forces in each direction.

     Ram or plunger actuators are a variation on the single acting design, but in this
case, the piston rod is the same diameter as the piston. This design is useful where
column loads are extremely high such as a service station lift, or when the rod hanging
in a horizontally mounted cylinder has a tendency to cause sagging.

     Telescoping linear actuators generate long stroke motions from a short body length
such as those on a dump truck. Force output varies with rod extension: highest at the
beginning, when the pressurized fluid acts on all of the multiple piston faces; and lowest
at the end of the stroke, when the pressurized fluid acts only on the last extension's
piston area. Telescoping cylinders may be either single or double acting.

9.1.2 Rotary Motion Actuators

     Rotary actuators produce oscillating power by rotating an output shaft through a
fixed arc. Rotary actuators are primarily one of two types:

         1. Linear motion piston/cylinder with rotary output transmission
         2. Rotary motion piston/cylinder coupled directly to output shaft

     The first of the two rotary actuator types generally uses one or two linearly moving
pistons to drive a transmission to convert the linear motion produced by the piston to a
rotary output motion. These rotary actuators generally use crankshafts, gear rack-and-
pinions or chains and sprockets as transmissions to convert the piston's linear output to
rotary output. The piston/cylinder design may be single or double acting.

     The second of the two rotary actuator types uses a piston designed to oscillate
through a fixed arc to directly drive the output shaft. This design is simpler than the
other type of rotary actuator as no transmission is required, but the unusual piston
shapes required can cause sealing problems.

Actuators  9-2  Revision C
     In a vane actuator the shaft is mounted in a cylindrical housing with one or more
vanes attached to the shaft. Applying fluid pressure to the vanes produces shaft
rotation. An electric motor may also be used to drive the output shaft. Torque motors
can also be used as an actuator (see Chapter 14). Torque motors are direct drive
induction motors which can operate indefinitely while stalled holding the actuator shaft
in position, applying a steady torque to the load.

9.2 ACTUATOR FAILURE MODES

     Typical modes of actuator failure are listed in Table 9-1. Forces acting upon
actuators include a combination of direct forces pushing in from any axis and a twisting
force that may be applied due to offset loads. The limiting factor in most actuators is the
thrust and other supporting bearings. Selection of bearings and their orientation in the
actuator greatly affects the maximum axial and side forces that can be applied during
acceleration and movement of the actuator shaft. These forces also include twisting
forces that apply an additional torque to the supporting bearings.

     The primary failure mode of an actuator is a reduction in output force or stroke.
This reduction in actuator output power can be caused by excessive wear of the
piston/cylinder contact surfaces, which results in an increase in fluid leakage past the
piston. Reduction in actuator output power can also be caused by external leakage,
such as leakage through the piston rod/rod seal interface. Deterioration of the piston
rod seal also permits ingestion of contaminants to the gap between the piston and
cylinder increasing the rate of wear and probability of problems associated with
corrosion.

     Another common failure mode for actuators is jamming of the piston caused by
stiction or misalignment. This failure can occur if excessive contaminants are ingested
or if excessive side loads are encountered. Misalignment also increases the rate of
piston/cylinder wear contributing to early failure. Temperature extremes may affect the
viscosity characteristics of the pressurized fluid and increased seal wear will result from
the resultant change in film lubrication.

     Valve assemblies commonly use actuators to control the valve position and in some
cases close the valve in event of system failure. Another use of an actuator in a valve is
to determine the valve position. Depending on the equipment design, one potential
failure mode requiring investigation is the loss of signal that a loss of accurate
positioning of an actuator can cause to software programming or valve controls.

Actuators  9-3  Revision C
                   Table 9-1. Typical Modes of Actuator Failure

    FAILURE MODE         FAILURE CAUSE                  FAILURE EFFECT
Internal leakage   Side loading and piston
External leakage   wear, contaminants past       Loss/reduction in output force
Damaged rod seal   rod seal
Spurious position  Seal leakage,                 Loss/reduction in output force
change             piston/cylinder wear
Jamming, seizure                                 Contaminants entering
Aeration           Excessive side loading        actuator between shaft and
                                                 cylinder
Bearing failure    Stiction, binding             Loss of output control or
                                                 incorrect signal transmission
Lead nut failure   Excessive loading             Loss of load control
                   Air drawn past rod seals      Damaged actuator and loss of
                   during actuation              seals

                   Axial or side load on thrust  Loss of output force, damaged
                   bearing exceeding             piston
                   manufacturer's specification

                   Axial load on thrust bearing  Loss of output force, damaged
                   exceeding manufacturer's      piston
                   specification

9.3 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR ACTUATOR

     The reliability of an actuator is primarily influenced by its load environment which
can be subdivided into external loads and internal loads. External loads are forces
acting on the actuator from outside sources due to its operating environment.
Conditions of storage, transportation and ground servicing as well as impact loads
during operation have an effect on the rate of failure. Internal loads are caused by
forces acting inside the actuator as a result of pressure variations, pressure differentials,

Actuators          9-4                                           Revision C
friction forces, temperature-related expansion and contraction, and by forces developed
and transmitted by the impact of external loads.

     Valves often form a part of an actuator assembly and are used for primary
movement control of the actuator and also for deceleration of the piston/rod assembly at
the ends of their stroke. Failure rate models for valve assemblies are presented in
Chapter 6 of this handbook. Chapter 3 includes failure rate models for the actuator rod
seals, connector O-rings, gaskets and mechanical seals.

     The complete failure rate model for the piston/cylinder actuator incorporates
modifiers for contamination and temperature effects. The complete model can be
expressed as follows:

           AC = AC,B i CCP i CT                                                        (9-1)

Where:      AC = Failure rate of actuator, failures/million cycles
           AC,BB = Base failure rate of actuator, failures/million cycles

                      [See Section 9.3.1 and Equations (9-6) and (9-14)]

            CCP = Contaminant multiplying factor (See Section 9.3.2)
             CT = Temperature multiplying factor (See Section 9.3.3)

9.3.1 Base Failure Rate for Actuator

     The primary failure effect of internal and external loads on an actuator is wear of the
piston and cylinder which results in an increase in leakage past the piston. A criteria of
actuator failure would then be a leakage rate resulting from wear which exceeds a
maximum allowable leakage rate specified by the user.

     Wear of the cylinder and piston will occur in two phases according to the Bayer-Ku
sliding wear theory (Reference 6). The first or constant wear phase is characterized by
the shearing of the surface asperities due to the sliding action of the piston within the
cylinder. During this period the wear rate is practically linear as a function of the
number of actuator cycles and the wear depth at the end of the constant wear phase is
one half the original surface finish. During the second or severe wear phase, wear
debris becomes trapped between the two sliding surfaces and gouging of the surfaces
takes place. The wear rate begins to increase very rapidly and failure of the actuator is
eminent. Therefore, while equations are presented in this chapter for the severe wear
phase, for practical purposes the failure rate or life of the actuator can be estimated as
that calculated for the constant wear phase.

Actuators  9-5                                                             Revision C
     The number of cycles to complete the constant wear phase can be predicted
analytically by a semi-empirical modification of Palmgren's equation (Reference 6)
resulting in the following equation:

               NO  =  2000       FY    9                                          (9-2)
                                       
                                 SC    

Where:     NO = Number of cycles in constant wear phase

            = Wear factor *

           Fy = Yield strength of softer material, lbs/in2 (See Table 9-3)
           Sc = Compressive stress between the surfaces, lbs/in2

   * The wear factor, , will be equal to 0.20 for materials that have a high

susceptibility to adhesive wear, in which the wear process involves a transfer of material
from one surface to the other. The wear factor will be equal to 0.54 for materials that
have little tendency to transfer material in which the material is subject to micro-gouging
of the surfaces by the asperities on the material surface.

     The maximum compressive stress caused by the cylinder acting on the piston is
computed assuming a linear distribution of stress level along the contact area. The
following equation has been derived for compressive stress of an actuator (Reference
6):

                           WS i     D1 - D2         1/ 2
                            L                      
           SC  = 0.8                D1D2                                          (9-3)
                                                   
                        1  -  2     +  1  -  2     
                                 1              2

                           E1             E2

Where:     WS = Side load on the actuator, lbf
            L = Total linear contact between piston and cylinder, in
Actuators  D1 = Diameter of cylinder, in
           D2 = Diameter of piston, in

           1 = Poisson's ratio, cylinder
           2 = Poisson's ratio, piston

           E1 = Modulus of elasticity, cylinder, lbs/in2

                                9-6                                   Revision C
                  E2 = Modulus of elasticity, piston, lbs/in2

     Substituting Equation (9-3) into Equation (9-2) and adding a constant for lubrication
provides an equation for the number of cycles for an actuator during the initial wear
phase until the severe wear period begins.

                               WS i D1 - D2            1/2  9             (9-4)
                                L D1D2                 
           NO = k1  FY                                 
                           1 -12        + 1-22              
                                                            
                           E1               E2              

Where:     k1 = 15.4 x 103 which includes a lubrication constant

     In a similar way, if the actuator is subjected to axial stress, Equation (9-5) can be
used to determine compressive stress. Which equation to use depends on the
application of the actuator, axial or side loading.

                                                  2         1/ 3
                                                          
                            WA    i     D1 - D2           
                                         D1D2             
                                                          
           SC  =  0.9                                                     (9-5)
                                  2              2     2
                            1  -     1  +  1  -     2  
                                                       
                               E1             E2

Where:     WA = Axial Load on the actuator, lbf
And:
                                                              1/  3    9
Actuators                                                            
                               WA    i     D1 - D2     2             
           NO = k2  FY                      D1D2                     
                                                                     
                                                                                      (9-6)
                               1  -  2     +  1  -22   2             
                                        1                                 Revision C
                                                 E2    
                                  E1

                                  9-7
Where:     k2 = 17.7 x 103 which includes a lubrication constant

     Since the second phase of wear is severe and relatively short, it can normally be
assumed that the calculated number of cycles, No, for the first phase of wear will be the
life of the actuator. During the second or severe wear phase, the following equation can
be used to determine the rate of wear (Reference 45):

           V  =  KW                       d    (N  -  NO )              (9-7)
                   H

Where:      V = Volume of material removed by wear during the second

                    phase, in3

           K = Wear coefficient (See Table 9-2)
           W = Applied load, lb
            d = Sliding distance, in
           H = Penetration hardness, psi
           N = Total number of cycles to failure
           No = Number of cycles at the end of the initial wear phase

Solving for N results in the equation:

              N= VH                            + NO                     (9-8)
                   KW d

     This second phase of wear is characterized by rapid wear until failure of the
actuator occurs usually as a result of poor response due to excessive leakage. The
leakage rate past the piston within the cylinder may be modeled as laminar flow
between parallel plates (Reference 5).

              Q  =                        D2 a3 p                       (9-9)

                                          12 L

Actuators                                 9-8               Revision C
Where:      Q = Leakage rate past piston, in3/sec
           D2 = Piston diameter, in

            a = Gap between piston and cylinder, in

           p = Pressure differential across piston, psi

             = Fluid viscosity, lbf-sec/in2

             L = Piston length, in

    The gap between the piston and cylinder, a, as shown in Figure 9.1 is a dynamic

term being a function of wear.

           a = ( D1 - D2 ) + h                                       (9-10)

Where:     D1 = Cylinder diameter, in

            h = Depth of wear scar, in

           Figure 9.1 Typical Single Acting Actuator

    The wear scar depth, h, will be equal to the volume of material lost due to wear, V,

divided by the contact surface area, A:

           h=V                                                       (9-11)
                A

Actuators  9-9                                           Revision C
     Substituting Equations (9-10) and (9-11) for wear gap into Equation (9-9) results in
the following equation for leakage rate between the piston and cylinder:

                      D2    (  D1  - D2 )  +  V3       p
                                              A 
           Q     =                                                                  (9-12)
                                   12 L

    Solving Equation (9-12) for V and substituting V in Equation (9-7) results in an

equation for the number of cycles to failure.

                  AH        12Q L  1/ 3                       
                 KW d        D2 p                ( D2         )
           N  =                               +        -  D1     +  NO              (9-13)
                                                               

     A similar equation can be developed by combining Equations (9-13) and (9-6) for
axial loading of the actuator. A typical plot of wear as a function of the number of cycles
is shown in Figure 9.2.

           Figure 9.2 Failure Rate as a Function of Cycles for a Typical
                    Actuator Under Different Axial and Side Loads.

Actuators                          9-10                                 Revision C
     Since the first phase of wear is fairly linear as a function of the number of cycles
and failure will occur soon after phase one wear, the base failure rate of the actuator
can be approximated as follows:

            AC , B  =  106                                                            (9-14)
                       NO

Where: AC,B = Base failure rate of actuator, failures/million cycles

             NO = Number of cycles in constant wear phase (See Equation (9-6))

         As noted in Equation (9-2), the ratio of Yield strength to compressive strength is
raised to the 9th power creating a wide range of resulting failure rates in Equation (9-14)

for small differences in material properties. Reliability testing may be required on a

sample of actuators to duplicate the curves as shown in Figure 9.2.

9.3.2 Contaminant Multiplying Factor

     As established in Equation (9-1), the failure rate of the actuator can be determined
as follows:

                          AC = AC,B i CCP i CT

Where:      AC = Failure rate of actuator, failures/million cycles
           AC,B = Base failure rate of actuator, failures/million cycles

            CCP = Contaminant multiplying factor
              CT = Temperature multiplying factor (See Section 9.3.3)

     During the time that the actuator is at rest, particles can work their way between the
piston and cylinder. Then, when the actuator is put into motion, increased forces are
needed to move the piston. This stiction phenomenon causes a loss of actuator
response and in some severe cases, a completely jammed component.

     Three types of wear need to be considered in determining the effects of
contaminants on actuator reliability:

           (1) Erosion - Particles carried in a fluid stream impact against the piston and
cylinder surfaces. If the kinetic energy released upon actuator response is large

Actuators              9-11                                               Revision C
compared to forces binding the piston/cylinder walls, surface fatigue will occur. Hard
particles may also cut away surface material.

           (2) Abrasive Wear - A hard particle entering the gap between the piston and
cylinder surfaces can cut away material of the softer surface on a single actuator
engagement. The rate of wear will be proportional to the number of particles in contact
with the surfaces and the particle hardness. If the hardness of the piston is significantly
less than that of the cylinder, a hard particle, absorbed by the softer material causes
severe abrasive wear of the harder actuator surface.

           (3) Surface Fatigue - Particulate contaminants interacting with the piston and
cylinder surfaces can dent a surface producing plastic deformation. Large numbers of
dislocations will increase the surface roughness and deteriorate the surface material.
The result is an accelerated rate of wear and a higher probability of leakage between
the surfaces.

     The deteriorating effects of contaminant particles on the reliability of an actuator
must be equated along with the probability of the contaminants entering the gap
between the actuator surfaces. The probability of contaminants entering this area will
depend on the operating environment, the types and numbers of particles expected to
be encountered, and the filtering system to prevent the entrance of particles. The
typical actuator contains a bushing to wipe the piston on the return stroke. The life
expectancy and reliability of this device must be determined as part of the overall
reliability estimate of the actuator.

     If the piston surface slides over a hard contaminant particle in the lubricant, the
surface may be subject to pitting. The abrasive particle has edges with a characteristic

radius, denoted by r. When the depth of penetration of the abrasive particle (d) reaches

a certain critical value, the scratching produces additional wear particles by pitting. This
elastic/plastic deformation process occurs when the maximum shear stress in the
complex stress distribution beneath the contact surface exceeds the elastic limit. This
maximum shear stress occurs beneath the contact at a depth equal to one half the
contact radius. The value of this critical depth is given by (Reference 48).

           dcrit  =  r      1  -  2 fs,max                           (9-15)
                        -         Fsy       
                     2

Where:     fs,max = Maximum shear stress, lbs/in2        Revision C
              r = Characteristic radius of particle, in
Actuators
             Fsy = Yield strength of material, lbs/in2

                                         9-12
     If this type of wear should occur, it is so severe that actuator performance would be
immediately affected and failure would occur. Actuators are designed to prevent
particles of sufficient size to cause this type of failure and the probability of failure from
this type of pitting is extremely low. The failure mode is presented here as a design
evaluation check on the sealing technique for the piston assembly.

     Fatigue wear on the microscopic wear due to contaminants is similar to that for
pitting just described except that it is associated with individual asperity contacts rather
than with a single large region. The additional material lost due to contaminant wear
process can be estimated in the same way as the adhesive wear process was
explained earlier in this chapter, the volume V removed on an individual piston stroke

proportional to a3 where a is the radius of the individual area of contact. Similarly, the

sliding distance L is proportional to the area of contact.

                V   A                                                  (9-16)
                L 3

Where:     A = Area of contact, in2

Summing for all contacts provides the following equation:

            V   =  1                 K1  A  =  K1W                     (9-17)
           L1N     3                           3 HV

Where:       V = Volume of material lost due to contaminant wear, in3
           L1 = Sliding distance of the piston, in
            N = Number of actuations
           K1 = Wear coefficient, See Table 9-2
             A = Area of contact, in2
            W = Transverse load on the actuator, lbs
           HV = Vickers hardness of the piston, lbs/in2

     This expression can be rewritten in the form to include a contaminant multiplying

factor, CCP:

           V = CCP W L1 N                                              (9-18)
                     HV

Actuators                            9-13                  Revision C
     The effect of the additional wear due to contaminant particles may be expressed as
an additive term in the basic wear relationship. It will be noted from the derivation of
equations for the effect of contaminant particles on actuator surface wear and the
possibility of stiction problems that a probability of damaging particles entering the gap
between the piston and cylinder must be estimated. The contaminant factors involved
are as follows:

         Hardness - The wear rate will increase with the ratio of particle hardness to
actuator surface hardness. It will normally be the hardness of the piston that will be of
concern. If the ratio is less than 1, negligible wear can be expected.

         Number of particles - The wear rate will increase with a concentration of
suspended particles of sufficient hardness.

         Size - For wear of the piston or cylinder to occur, the particle must be able to
enter the gap between the two surfaces. The particle must also be equal to or greater
than the lubrication film thickness. With decreasing film thickness, a greater proportion
of contaminant particles entering the gap will bridge the lubrication film, producing
increased surface damage.

         Shape - Rough edged and sharp thin particles will cause more damage to the
actuator surfaces than rounded particles. As the particles remain in the gap, they will
become more rounded and produce less wear. It is the more recent particles being
introduced into the gap that cause the damage.

The contaminant multiplying factor can be established as follows:

           CCP = CH i CS i CN                                                  (9-19)

Where:

           CH = Particle hardness multiplying factor = HP/HC

           Hp = Piston Hardness (See Table 9-1)

           HC = Cylinder Hardness (See Table 9-1)

           CS = Filtration multiplying factor = Filter size (micron) / 10

                     CN = Particle size multiplying factor - For most applications the
particle size factor will be equal to approximately 1.0. For severe conditions where the
number of contaminants and particle size can be expected to increase, the particle size
factor may be expected to approach a value of 2.0.

9.3.3 Temperature Multiplying Factor

     The effect of the temperature of the surface on the wear rate is a complicated
phenomenon, because the corrosion of the wear debris at different temperatures

Actuators                             9-14                         Revision C
produces different oxidation products. Chemical interactions with the metal surfaces

result in different wear rates as the temperature of the surface is changed (Reference

51). For example, the formation of Fe3O4 is likely to predominate when steel is subject
to wear in the temperature range between 300 C to 500 C.

     Wear of metals has been related to the heat of absorption of molecules of debris
(Reference 51). The basic relationship in this treatment is:

             V  =  K1W   L1  CO e /T                                               (9-20)
                     HV

Where:       Co = Arrhenius constant
              = Activation energy constant, K

             T = Operating temperature, K

Values for the parameter  are in the range between 1200 K and 6000 K.

     The effect of variation of temperature may be determined by eliminating the

Arrhenius constant in terms of the value of the exponential at ambient temperature T.

Making this substitution into Equation (9-20), the following is obtained:

                                V = CT K1W L1 N                                    (9-21)
                                           HV

From Reference 45, the temperature multiplying factor, CT, is given by:

             e CT = /Ta[1-(Ta /T )]                                                (9-22)

Where:       Ta = Ambient temperature, 25.2 C
             T = Operating temperature, C

It is noted that the ratio  /Ta is in the range between 4.0 and 20.0.

For most situations  will be equal to 1200 K and Equation (9-22) can be simplified

as follows:

             CT = e 4[1-(25.2/T )]                                                 (9-23)

Actuators                9-15                                          Revision C
                       Table 9-1. Material Hardness

           (Use ratio of hardest particle/piston hardness for CH)

                     MATERIAL               HARDNESS
                                             (HV x 106)

           Plain carbon steels

           - Low strength steel             140

           - High strength steel            220

           Low-alloy Steels

           - 4320                           640

           - 4340                           560

           Stainless Steels

           - 303                            170

           - 304                            160

           - 631 (17-7 PH hardened)         520

           - 631 (17-7 PH annealed)         170

           - Austenitic AISI 201 annealed)  210

           - Martensitic 440C (hardened)    635

           - 630 (17-4 PH hardened)         470

           Nickel Alloys

           - 201                            100

           Nickel-copper Alloys

           - Monel (annealed)               120

           - Monel K-500 (annealed)         162

           Ni-Cr-Mo-Fe Alloys

           - Inconnel 625                   140

           - Hastelloy                      200

           Aluminum

           - AISI 1100 (annealed)           25

           - AISI 1100 (cold worked)        45

           - AISI 2024 (annealed)           50

           - AISI 2024 T4 (heat treated)    125

           - AISI 6061 (annealed)           32

           - AISI 6061 T6 (heat treated)    100

Actuators                         9-16                             Revision C
Table 9-2. Values of Wear Coefficient (K1) In The Severe-Wear Region
                                        (Reference 45)

                        MATERIAL                          K1

           4130 Alloy Steel (piston)                   0.0218
           4130 Alloy Steel (cylinder)                 0.0221

           17-4 PH Stainless Steel (piston)            0.0262
           4130 Alloy Steel (cylinder)                 0.0305

           9310 Alloy Steel (piston)                   0.0272
           4130 Alloy Steel (cylinder)                 0.0251

           Table 9-3. Values of Yield Strength for Various Metals

           Metal                             Yield strength, ksi

           Ordinary structural steel         30 - 40

           Low alloy, high strength steel 40 - 80

           Heat treated steel casting        40 - 120

           Cold rolled steel                 70 - 85

           Stainless steel                   50 - 80

           Heat treated wrought aluminum 10 - 50

           Aluminum alloy                    35 - 42

           Pure rolled aluminum              5 - 21

           Cast aluminum                     15 - 25

           Wrought iron                      25 - 35

           Cast iron                         8 - 40

           Magnesium alloy                   11 - 30

Actuators                              9-17                        Revision C
9.4 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 9, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of an
actuator assembly.

5. Bauer, P., M. Glickmon and F. Iwatsuki, "Analytical Techniques for the Design of
      Seals for Use in Rocket Propulsion Systems", Volume 1, ITT Research Institute,
      Technical Report AFROL-TR-65-61 (May 1965)

6. Bayer, R.G., A.T. Shalhey and A.R. Watson, "Designing for Zero Wear", Machine
      Design (January 1970)

11. Canterbury, Jack and James Lowther, "Application of Dimensional Analysis to the
      Prediction of Mechanical Reliability", Naval Weapons Support Activity, Washington
      Navy Yard, Washington, D.C., Report ADAD35295 (September 1976)

38. Roack and Young, Formulas for Stress and Strain, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY
      1989

45. Barron, Randall F., "Revision of Wear Model for Stock Actuators, Engineering
      Model for Mechanical Wear" (July, 1987)

48. Kragelsky, I.V. and Alisin, Friction, Wear and Lubrication, Volume 2, Pergamon
      Press, London (1981)

49. Kuhlmann-Hildorf, D. "Parametric Theory of Adhesive Wear in Uni-directional
      sliding", Wear of Materials, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York
      (1983)

50. Bently, R.M. and D.J. Duquette, "Environmental Considerations in Wear
      Processes", Fundamentals of Friction and Wear of Materials, American Society of
      Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1981)

51. Sarkar, A.D., Wear of Metals, pp.62-68, Pergamon Press, London (1976)

80. D. Pratt, "Results of Dayton 5A701 Linear Actuator Reliability Investigation",
      Report No. TM 93-89 SY, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, Maryland
      (1994)

120. Tyler G. Hicks, Handbook of Mechanical Engineering Calculations, McGraw-Hill,
        2006

Actuators  9-18  Revision C
                         10 CHAPTER

                         PUMPS

10.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     10.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
        10.1.1 Centrifugal Pump....................................................................................... 2
        10.1.2 Positive Displacement Pump..................................................................... 3

     10.2 FAILURE MODES............................................................................................ 4
        10.2.1 Cavitation .................................................................................................. 6
        10.2.2 Vortexing ................................................................................................... 7
        10.2.3 Operating Environment ............................................................................. 7
        10.2.4 Interference ............................................................................................... 8
        10.2.5 Corrosion and Erosion............................................................................... 8
        10.2.6 Material Fatigue......................................................................................... 9
        10.2.7 Bearing Failure .......................................................................................... 9

     10.3 MODEL DEVELOPMENT ................................................................................ 9
     10.4 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR PUMP SEALS ............................................... 11
     10.5 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR PUMP SHAFT ............................................... 11
     10.6 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR PUMP BEARINGS ........................................ 12
     10.7 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR PUMP CASING ............................................. 13
     10.8 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR FLUID DRIVER ............................................. 13

        10.8.1 Percent Flow Multiplying Factor .............................................................. 14
        10.8.2 Operating Speed Multiplying Factor ........................................................ 14
        10.8.3 Contaminant Multiplying Factor ............................................................... 15
     10.9 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 20

10.1 INTRODUCTION

     Pumps are one of the most common types of mechanical components used by
today's society, exceeded only by electric motors. Not surprisingly, there are in
existence today, an almost endless number of pump types that function in systems with
dissimilar operating and environmental characteristics. With so many different pump
types it is impossible to establish a failure rate database based on design parameters,
their use, and the materials used to construct them, or the type of fluid they move. All of
these categories tend to overlap for the many different pump types. Therefore, a
system to differentiate between all types of pumps is necessary. This system considers
the method by which energy is added to the fluid being pumped. As seen by Figure
10.1, a pump can be classified into two general classes: Centrifugal and Positive

Pumps              10-1  Revision C
Displacement. These classes represent the two ways in which energy is added to the
fluid.

                                                                                 PUMP

              CENTRIFUGAL                                            POSITIVE
                                                                 DISPLACEMENT

Axial Flow    Radial Flow     Peripheral          Reciprocating                Rotary
              Mixed Flow

Single Stage  Single Suction  Single Stage  Piston       Diaphragm  Single                 Multiple
Multistage    Double Suction  Multistage    Plunger                 Rotor                   Rotor

                                                  Power  Simplex     Piston                    Gear
                                                  Steam  Multiplex    Vane                     Lobe
                                                                       Single
                                                                       Screw                   Multiple
                                                                                               Screw

                              Figure 10.1 Pump Configurations

10.1.1 Centrifugal Pump

      Centrifugal pumps consist of a set of rotating vanes, enclosed within a housing or
casing, used to impart energy to a fluid through centrifugal force. The centrifugal pump
has two main parts: a rotating element which includes an impeller and a shaft, and a
stationary element made up of a volute casing, stuffing box, and bearings. With
centrifugal pumps, the energy is added continuously by increasing the fluid velocity with
a rotating impeller while reducing the flow area. This arrangement causes an increase
in pressure along with the corresponding movement of the fluid. The impeller produces
liquid velocity and the volute forces the liquid to discharge from the pump converting
velocity to pressure. The stuffing box protects the pump from leakage at the point
where the shaft passes out through the pump casing.

     Centrifugal pumps can be further classified as to one of the following three designs:

· Axial Flow - In an axial flow pump, pressure is developed by the propelling or lifting
    action of the impeller vanes on the liquid. Axial flow pumps are sometimes referred
    to as propeller pumps.

Pumps                                       10-2                               Revision C
· Radial or Mixed Flow ­ In a radial flow pump, the liquid enters at the center of the
    impeller and is directed out along the impeller blades in a direction at right angles to
    the pump shaft. The pressure is developed wholly by centrifugal force.

· Peripheral - Peripheral pumps employ a special impeller with a large number of
    radial blades. As the fluid is discharged from one blade, it is transferred to the root
    of the next blade and given additional energy.

10.1.2 Positive Displacement Pump

     Positive displacement pumps differ from centrifugal pump designs in that energy is
added to the fluid periodically by the movement of control mechanisms causing
displacement of fluid and an increase in pressure. A positive displacement pump unlike
a centrifugal pump will produce the same flow at a given rotational or cyclic speed
regardless of the discharge pressure. The positive displacement pump contains an
expanding cavity on the suction side of the pump and a decreasing cavity on the
discharge side. Fluid enters into the pump as the cavity on the suction side expands
and the fluid is forced out of the discharge as the cavity collapses. Positive
displacement pumps can be subdivided into reciprocating and rotary types and this
principle applies to any individual reciprocating or rotary pump design.

     Positive displacement pumps deliver a definite volume of fluid for each cycle of
pump operation. Therefore, the only factor that affects flow rate in an ideal positive
displacement pump is the speed at which it operates. The flow resistance of the system
in which the pump is operating will not affect the flow through the pump. As the
discharge pressure of the pump increases, some amount of fluid leaks from the
discharge of the pump back to the pump suction, thus reducing the effective flow rate of
the pump. This fluid leakage from the pump discharge to the suction area is called
slippage. Positive displacement pumps come in many designs and performance
specifications, but they all work on the same principle. An increasing volume is opened
to suction, filled, closed, moved to discharge, and displaced. The delivered capacity is
nearly constant throughout the discharge pressure range.

     Reciprocating pump - A reciprocating pump is characterized by a back-and-forth
motion of pistons inside of cylinders that provides the flow of fluid. Each stroke of a
reciprocating pump delivers a definite volume of liquid to the system. The master
cylinder of the automobile brake system is an example of a simple reciprocating pump.
Reciprocating pumps include piston, plunger and diaphragm.

     Rotary pump - Rotary pumps operate on the principle that a rotating vane, screw, or
gear traps the fluid on the suction side of the pump casing and forces it to the discharge
side of the casing. A rotary displacement pump is different from a centrifugal pump in
that in a centrifugal pump, the liquid displacement and pumping action depend on
developed liquid velocity, while a rotary pump operates on the positive displacement

Pumps  10-3  Revision C
principle, each revolution delivering a definite volume of liquid to the system. Rotary
pumps include gear, lobe, piston, screw and vane.

10.2 FAILURE MODES

     Due to the large number of pump types and applications, some failure modes are
more prevalent than others for a specific category of pump. For example, with
displacement pumps there is a much greater chance for cyclic fatigue to have an effect
on the system than with centrifugal pumps. This is due to the inherent difference in
designs. Displacement pumps have pressure transients which cause temporary
unbalanced forces to be applied to the pump and its system. The displacement pump
and driver shafting can experience much higher stresses during operation due to the
uneven torque loading caused by this natural imbalance. A positive displacement pump
does not have a shut-off head as does a centrifugal pump and cannot be operated
against a closed valve on the discharge side of the pump. If a positive displacement
pump is allowed to operate against a closed discharge valve or other obstruction, it will
continue to produce flow, increasing the pressure in the discharge line until either the
line bursts or the pump is severely damaged or both. Thus a relief valve incorporated
within the pump assembly or incorporated on the discharge side of a positive
displacement pump is an absolute necessity.

     Centrifugal pumps tend to be more balanced than positive displacement pumps and
aren't as susceptible to large stress variations. There are three main factors that affect
the reliability of a centrifugal pump including operating speed, impeller diameter and
flow rate. Operating speed affects the wear in the rubbing contact surfaces of shaft
seals, bearing life and the heat generated by the bearings and lubricants. Impeller
diameter affects reliability through the loads it imposes on the shaft and bearings. And
flow rate affects reliability of a centrifugal pump when it is different than that established
by the Best Efficiency Point (BEF) causing increasing and turbulent loads on the
impeller. BEF operation is discussed in more detail in Section 10.8.1.

     A major effect on performance of a positive displacement pump is a loss of flow due
to slippage. The expanding cavity on the inlet side of a positive displacement pump
creates a low pressure area that needs to be filled with fluid. This cavity can be filled
with fluid from the inlet line in normal performance. However, if slippage occurs, the
cavity will also be partly filled with fluid flowing back through the pump clearances from
the outlet side. When a positive displacement pump is operating under a slippage
condition, the pump loses the ability to deliver the volume of fluid it is theoretically
capable of pumping. For a given pump and fluid, the slippage is proportional to the
pressure differential from outlet to inlet. If the pump had no slippage the volume
pumped would be directly proportional to the rotational speed of the pump.

     Typical failure modes of pumps are shown in Table 10-1 and Table 10-2.

Pumps  10-4  Revision C
            Table 10-1. Typical Failure Modes of Centrifugal Pump Assemblies

     FAILURE MODE                  FAILURE CAUSE                   FAILURE EFFECT
Reduction in suction     - Pump cavitation
head                                                       - Loss of pump efficiency
Reduction in pump        - Pump cavitation
pressure                                                   - Eventual erosion of impeller,
                         - Incorrect fluid                   casing
Component corrosion      - Excessive flow rate for fluid
                         - High radial thrust on pump      - Pump noise and vibration
Shaft deflection                                           - Eventual catastrophic pump
                          Rotor
                                                            failure
Shaft unbalance          - Impeller wear                   - Eventual shaft and pump
                                                           failure
Air leak thru gasket /   - Damaged gasket                  - Shaft deflection and
stuffing box
External Leakage         - Seal failure                     Misalignment
                         - Worn mechanical seal            - Stuffing box leakage
Mechanical noise         - Scored shaft sleeve             - Seal leakage
                         - Stuffing box improperly packed  - Bearing wear

                         - Debris in the impeller          - Loss of pump head
                         - Impeller out of balance
                         - Bent shaft                      - Depends on type of fluid and
                         - Worn/damaged bearing             criticality as to time of failure
                         - Foundation not rigid
                         - Cavitation                      - Eventual wear of impeller and
                                                             other components
Positive suction head too - Clogged suction pipe
                         - Valve on suction line only      - Suction cavitation
low                                                        - Noisy operation
                         partially open                    - Low discharge pressure
                                                           - High output flow rate
Pump discharge head too  - Clogged discharge pipe          - Discharge cavitation
high                     - Discharge line valve only       - Noisy operation
                                                           - Low output flow rate
                          partially open                   - Loss of pump output / reduced

Suction line / impeller  - Contaminants                      flow
clogged                                                    - Loss of pump output / reduced

Worn / broken impeller - Wrong flow rate, contaminants      flow
                                                           - Pump failure
Thrust bearing failure   - Excessive axial load

     Pumps                                10-5             Revision C
Table 10-2. Typical Failure Modes of Positive Displacement Pump Assemblies

FAILURE MODE               FAILURE CAUSE                             FAILURE EFFECT

Pump cavitation            - Reduction in suction head       - Pump noise and vibration
                                                             - Eventual erosion of rotor,
Component corrosion        - Incorrect fluid
Low net positive suction   - Excessive flow rate for fluid    casing
head (NPSH)                                                  - Eventual catastrophic pump
                           - Pump cavitation
Shaft unbalance                                               failure
                           - Torsional vibration
                                                             - Reduced pump efficiency
External Leakage           - Seal failure
Mechanical noise           - Worn mechanical seal            - Shaft deflection and
                           - Scored shaft sleeve              misalignment
                           - Stuffing box improperly packed
                                                             - Seal leakage
                           - Bent shaft                      - Bearing wear
                           - Worn/damaged bearing
                           - Foundation not rigid            - Depends on type of fluid
                           - Cavitation                       and criticality as to time of
                                                              failure
Positive suction head too  - Clogged suction pipe
low                        - Valve on suction line only      - Eventual wear of piston or
                                                              rotor, and other components
                            partially open
                                                             - Suction cavitation
Pump discharge head too    - Clogged discharge pipe          - Noisy operation
high                       - Discharge line valve only       - Low discharge pressure
                                                             - High output flow rate
                            partially open                   - Discharge cavitation
                                                             - Noisy operation
Suction line clogged       - Contaminants                    - Low output flow rate
                                                             - No pump output / reduced flow
Pressure surges            - Incorrect NPSH
                                                             - Cavitation damage
Increased fluid            - Incorrect fluid viscosity for
temperature                 pump                             - Misaligned pump driver

10.2.1 Cavitation

     Cavitation occurs when the pump suction is under a low pressure/high vacuum
condition creating vapor bubbles at the inlet of the pump. Dynamic motion of the pump
moves the bubbles to the discharge side of the pump where the discharge pressure

Pumps                                      10-6              Revision C
collapses the vapor bubbles. This imploding action attacks the pump components
removing chunks of material from their surfaces and causes premature failure of the
pump. In order for cavitation to occur, the local pressure must be at or below the vapor
pressure of the liquid. When a fluid flows over a surface having a curvature, there is a
tendency for the pressure near the surface to be lowered. There is a separation of fluid
flow lines where there are different velocity regions. Between these fluid regions,
turbulence can form which may cause bubbles to occur if the pressure is low enough.
The collapsing of these bubbles can cause noise and vibrations. Sometimes, these
pressure changes can be very dramatic and cause extensive damage to impellers,
rotors, casings or shafts. If exposed for a sufficiently long time, pitting or severe erosion
can occur.

     Cavitation generally occurs in the first stage of a multistage centrifugal pump,
although second stages have also been found to be effected when the suction head is
substantially reduced. With positive displacement pumps like the rotary screw,
cavitation can also occur. For these pumps it is important to understand the
characteristics of entrained and dissolved air with respect to the vapor pressure of the
fluid medium. The rotary screw pump shows a greater tendency for cavitation when the
total available pressure at the pump inlet is below atmospheric pressure. With both
displacement and centrifugal pumps, cavitation can be identified and easily remedied.
Many times the inlet piping arrangement can be modified which will cause flow patterns
that alleviate the problem.

10.2.2 Vortexing

      Vortexing in centrifugal pumps is caused by insufficient fluid height above the
suction line entrance or excess fluid velocity at the suction line entrance causing a noisy
pump operation and loss of fluid flow. Vortexing of the fluid in a suction sump or pit
sounds a lot like cavitation problems and will cause excessive shaft deflection and
damage to mechanical seals, bearings and the pump intake structure and piping.
Vortexing problems are intermittent as the vortices form as opposed to cavitation which
once started tends to be a constant problem. There are several possible causes of a
vortexing problem:

      · The pump running at a faster speed than specified
      · A change in the flow or volume to the pump inlet
      · The inlet line is restricted with contaminant solids
      · Excess air in the liquid

10.2.3 Operating Environment

     The effect of the ambient temperature and altitude on performance is normally
independent of the type of pump. Limits for satisfactory performance are established

Pumps                         10-7  Revision C
primarily by the effect of the environment on the fluid rather than by the type of pumping
action. Humidity only affects requirements for the pump casing. When operating
temperature extremes are specified for a hydraulic system, the operating temperature of
the fluid, not the ambient temperature, is usually the critical factor.

     Minimum operating temperature is normally set by the increase in fluid viscosity as
operating temperature is decreased. When the fluid viscosity is increased to the point
where inlet conditions can no longer keep the pump completely full, cavitation, with
possible pump damage, occurs. Fire resistant fluids have a higher specific gravity than
petroleum oils and higher viscosity at lower temperatures. They may also contain water
which can vaporize at lower pressures or higher temperatures. Thus, pump inlet
conditions are more sensitive when these fluids are used. High altitudes can produce
similar effects when the fluid reservoir is not pressurized.

     Because pumps are designed for specific fluids, failure rates of seals can increase if
alternate fluids are used. Above allowable operating temperatures, many oils will be too
thin to maintain proper lubrication at high-load points, and may progressively deteriorate
a graphite seal as a result of oxidation. Under elevated temperatures, some seals may
harden. See Chapter 3.

10.2.4 Interference

      For rotary displacement pumps, the interference problem must be seriously
addressed since very small distortions of rotors will decrease the clearance causing
rubbing or direct impact between the moving parts of the pump. Thermal expansion can
also pose a threat if there is no care taken in the proper selection of materials.
Improper installation can also lead to interference problems. With centrifugal pumps,
cavitation significantly increases the interference problem because cavitation causes
vibration and imbalance. Interference can be avoided by designing the parts with
appropriate elastic and thermal properties so that excessive load or temperature won't
significantly deflect internal parts. Manufacturing tolerances must be carefully
maintained.

10.2.5 Corrosion and Erosion

      Consideration must be made for other possible failure modes such as erosion
corrosion. Erosion corrosion is an acceleration of the rate of corrosion attack in metal
components due to the relative motion of a corrosive fluid and a metal surface. Erosion
is dependent on the rate of liquid flow through the pump and also the angle of attack at
which the fluid impinges on the material. A combination of erosion and corrosion can
lead to extremely high pitting rates. The analysis of pump reliability must therefore
determine if there are abrasive solids in the fluid.

Pumps  10-8  Revision C
10.2.6 Material Fatigue

     Pump shafts, bearings, gears, impellers and all other moving metal components of
the pump are candidates for material fatigue failure. Material fatigue occurs with all
types of pumps, but may have more of an effect on displacement pumps, which have
higher fluctuating stresses. One component that often creates a material fatigue
problem is an unbalanced impeller resulting in the vibration of components throughout
the pump.

10.2.7 Bearing Failure

     Although bearings are relatively inexpensive, they can cause costly shutdowns of
complete systems. Short bearing life for centrifugal pumps, for example, can be caused
by a number of problems including the following: misalignment, a bent shaft, a rotating
part rubbing on a stationary part, an impeller out of balance causing vibration, excessive
thrust caused by mechanical failure inside the pump, excessive bearing temperature
caused by lack of lubrication, dirt or other contaminant in the fluid, excessive grease or
oil in an anti-friction bearing housing, and rusting of bearings from water in housing.

      Most bearing problems can be classified by the following failure modes: fatigue,
wiping, overheating, corrosion, and wear. Fatigue occurs due to cyclic loads normal to
the bearing surface. Wiping occurs as a result of insufficient lubrication film thickness
and the resulting surface-to-surface contact. Loss of sufficient lubricant film thickness
can occur from under-rotation or from system fluid losses. Overheating is shown by
babbitt cracking or surface discoloration. Corrosion is frequently caused by the
chemical reaction between the acids in the lubricants and the base metals in the babbitt.

10.3 MODEL DEVELOPMENT

     Reliability models have been developed to address the difference between pump
types. Because of the physical design differences between centrifugal and displacement
pumps they have specific performance and reliability advantages and disadvantages.
Centrifugal pumps are limited by pressure but can supply almost any amount of
capacity desired. Displacement pumps lose capacity as the pressure increases due to
the increase in slippage which occurs with an increase in pump pressure. The amount
of slippage can vary from pump to pump depending on the actual manufactured
clearances in the pump chamber. The slippage can also increase with time as wear
increases. Slippage will be inversely proportional to the fluid viscosity. Equation (10-1)
shows that since slippage "S" increases as the pressure requirements increase, the
value of capacity "Q" is decreased.

       Q = 7.48( DN - S )            (10-1)

Pumps  10-9                Revision C
Where:  Q = Capacity, gpm
        D = Net fluid transferred or displaced by one cycle, ft3

        N = Rotation or cyclic speed, revolutions/minute, cycles/minute
        S = Slippage, ft3/min (The quantity of fluid that escapes the full

               discharge cycle through clearances or other leak paths)

     The impellers, rotors, shafts, and casings are the pump components which should
generally have the longer lives when compared to bearings and seals. With good
designs and proper material selection, the reliability of impellers, rotors, shafts and
casings should remain very high. In order to properly determine total pump reliability,
failure rate models have been developed for each pump component.

     Pump assemblies are comprised of many component parts including seals, shaft,
bearings, casing, and fluid driver. The fluid driver can be further broken down into the
various types common to pumps including the two general categories for centrifugal and
displacement pumps. For displacement pumps, it will be broken down into two further
categories: reciprocating and rotary. For reciprocating pumps the fluid drivers can be
classified as piston/plunger type or diaphragm type. For rotary pumps the fluid driver is
a vane type for single rotors and for multiple rotors it is common to find a gear, lobe, or
screw type of fluid driver. The total pump failure rate is a combination of the failure
rates of the individual component parts. The failure rate for centrifugal pumps and
displacement pumps can be estimated using Equation (10-2).

                     P = SE + SH + BE + CA + FD                             (10-2)

Where:   P = Total failure rate of the pump

        SE = Total failure rate for all pump seals, failures/million

                   operating hours (See Section 10.4 and Chapter 3)

        SH = Failure rate for the pump shaft, failures/million

                   operating hours (See Section 10.5 and Chapter 20)

        BE = Total failure rate for all pump bearings, failures/million

                   operating hours (See Section 10.6 and Chapter 7)

        CA = Failure rate for the pump casing, failures/million

                   operating hours (See Section 10.7)

        FD = Failure rate for the pump fluid driver, failures/million

                   operating hours (See Section 10.8)

Pumps   10-10  Revision C
10.4 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR PUMP SEALS, SE

     The pump assembly will contain several types of seals such as O-rings on the fluid
connectors, gaskets and mechanical seals. Failure rate equations for O-rings and
gaskets are contained in Chapter 3. Mechanical seals of the pump require a specific
evaluation of reliability. Mechanical seals for rotating shaft applications move the point
of the seal away from the shaft to specially designed sealing faces that gradually wear
down. A balanced mechanical seal is designed so that the effective contact pressure is
always less than the fluid pressure, reducing friction at the seal faces. The result is less
rubbing wear, less heat generated and higher system fluid pressure capability. In an
unbalanced seal, fluid pressure is not relieved by the face geometry; the seal faces
withstand full system fluid pressure plus surge pressures and spring pressure. Thus,
the face contact pressure is greater than or equal to system fluid pressure. The
balanced seal design is more expensive than the unbalanced design but provides
higher reliability and longer life. Chapter 3 contains specific failure rate equations and
failure modes for mechanical seals.

10.5 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR PUMP SHAFT, SH

     A typical pump shaft assembly is shown in Figure 10.3. The reliability of the pump
shaft itself is generally very high when compared to other components of the pump.
Torque limits of the shaft must be compatible with requirements of the pump application.
High viscosity/low speed applications produce high torque requirements. Studies have
shown (Reference 26) that the average failure rate for the shaft itself is about eight
times less than mechanical seals and about three times less than that of the ball
bearings. The possibility that the shaft itself will fracture, or become inoperable is very
unlikely when compared to the more common pump failure modes. Usually the seals or
bearings will cause problems first.

     The effect of the shaft on reliability of other components is of greater importance
than the reliability of the shaft itself. For centrifugal pumps, there is a large difference in
deflection among the types of pump casing design. In a single volute casing, there are
varying amounts of fluid pressure distributed about the casing causing unequal
distributions of forces on the pump shaft. This imbalance causes shaft deflection and
greater seal and bearing wear.

     The amount of radial thrust will vary depending on the casing design and fluid flow.
The thrust load will increase from normal operation for any type of casing design when
the pump is not run at its optimum flow rate speed. When the pump is not operating at
its optimum rate, then the type of casing design will have a significant effect on the
radial load.

Pumps  10-11  Revision C
                               Figure 10.3 Typical Pump Shaft Assembly
                                                    (Reference 8)

     The single volute type shows the greatest pressure imbalance and hence, the
greatest deflection. This imbalance is decreased through different casing designs. The
modified concentric casing and the double volute casing both have lower relative radial
thrust because they cause a more even pressure distribution across the face of the
impeller. The double volute is the most balanced and the design with the least amount
of radial thrust. The maximum deflection recommended for a shaft design is
approximately 0.001 inches.

     The shaft diameter may be stepped up several times from the end of the coupling to
its center to facilitate impeller mounting. Starting with the maximum diameter at the
impeller mounting as shown in Figure 10.3, there is a step down for the shaft sleeve and
another for the external shaft nut, followed by several more for the bearings and the
coupling. Therefore, the shaft diameter at the impeller exceeds that required for
torsional strength at the coupling by at least an amount sufficient to provide all
intervening stepdowns. Chapter 20 provides the reliability model for pump shafts.

10.6 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR PUMP BEARINGS, BE

     Bearings are used in pump assemblies to locate the rotating or linear element in its
correct position relative to the stationary parts of the pump, maintain minimum friction
and absorb radial and axial loads transmitted through the shaft. Bearing reliability will in
turn be affected by the strength of the shaft and housing to minimize the effects of
externally induced stresses or vibration. The lubricant separates the rolling elements
and raceway contact surfaces and minimizes the effect of friction. Chapter 7 provides
the equations and procedures for determining bearing reliability.

Pumps  10-12                                   Revision C
10.7 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR PUMP CASING, CA

    The pump casing is normally a very reliable component. Defined as CA, the casing

failure rate will have a greater effect on total pump reliability from the standpoint of how
it affects other less reliable components. For instance, for an ANSI pump, the casing
may have an average life expectancy of 10 years where a seal or bearing may have
only one or two years. However, the type of casing used in the pump can have a large
effect on the lifetime of the bearings and seals. This is due to differing loads placed on
the pump shaft by the fluid flow pattern. The fluid flow patterns are a function of the

casing design. The failure rate of the pump casing (CA) itself can be estimated at 0.01

failures/million hours.

10.8 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR FLUID DRIVER, FD

     All pumps require some vehicle to move the fluid from the intakes and expel it
through the volutes and output ports to the exhaust opening. The means by which
pumps do this is what differentiates most of today's numerous types of pumps. The
reliability of these fluid drivers will vary from pump to pump. Impellers will wear out long
after the seals. Pump gears for rotary gear pumps will have a lower reliability than
impellers due to the nature of the contact between gears and the speed they attain.

     Piston-plunger displacement pumps will generally have greater wear rates for the
piston walls and rings than for the impellers of centrifugal pumps. The average failure
rates in Table 10-4 have been determined from data base information developed from
various failure rate data sources. The equations that describe the fluid driver wear rate
may vary drastically since the fluid driver varies greatly in design and application. Other
chapters of this Handbook can be used to estimate the failure rates for slider-crank
mechanisms, mechanical couplings, valves and other components and parts unique to
the particular pump design.

     In a centrifugal pump, the net positive suction head (NPSH) varies as a function of
flow determined by pressure. In a positive displacement pump NPSH varies as a
function of flow determined by speed. Reducing the speed of a positive displacement
pump reduces the NPSH. NPSHA is the actual NPSH and NPSHR is the required
NPSH obtained from the pump manufacturer. Depending on the pump design a
NPSHA / NPSHR margin of 1.1 to 2.5 should be obtained.

     The failure rate of a pump fluid driver can be estimated from the following equation:

Pumps  FD = FD,B i CPF i CPS i CC i CSF            (10-3)

                              10-13      Revision C
Where:   FD = Failure rate for the pump fluid driver, failures/million

                    operating hours

        FD,B = Base failure rate of pump fluid driver (See Table 10-4)
         CPF = Percent flow multiplying factor (See Section 10.8.1)
         CPS = Operating speed multiplying factor (See Section 10.8.2)
          CC = Contaminant multiplying factor (See Section 10.8.3)
         CSF = Service factor multiplying factor (See Table 10-5)

10.8.1 Percent Flow Multiplying Factor

     A centrifugal pump is designed to operate most reliably at one capacity for a given
RPM and impeller diameter. This flow rate is called the Best Efficiency Point (BEP). At
this flow, hydraulic loads imposed on the impeller are minimized and are steady. At
flows greater than or less than the BEP the hydraulic loads increase in intensity and
become unsteady due to turbulence in the casing and impeller. As a result, hydraulic
loads, which are transmitted to the shaft and bearings, increase and become unsteady.
Shaft deflection changes as a function of the fluid flow rate through the pump. As a
pump's capacity increases or decreases, moving away from the point of maximum
efficiency, fluid pressures around the impeller become unequal, tending to deflect it.
Special casings, such as diffusers and double-volute and concentric casings can greatly
reduce the radial thrust and, hence, the deflection.

     Also, the severity of these unsteady loads can cause failures of the mechanical
seal. Operation at reduced flow rates that put the pump into its recirculation mode can
also lead to cavitation damage in high suction energy pumps. The effect on reliability of
operating a pump too far from its maximum efficiency point is shown in Figure 10.4.

    The Percent Flow multiplying factor (CPF) is dependent upon the casing type and

pump capacity percentage. The pump capacity percentage is the actual operating flow

divided by the maximum pump specification flow. Values for CPF are shown in Figure

10.4 and related equations are included in Table 10-3.

10.8.2 Operating Speed Multiplying Factor

     Operating speed affects the failure rate of a pump caused by the increased
rotational or cyclic speed leading to accelerated rubbing wear of shaft and mechanical
seal faces, increased bearing friction and lubricant degradation. Increased operating
speed also increases the energy level of the pump which can lead to cavitation damage.
The effects of wear on these components are almost linear as a function of speed.

Pumps   10-14  Revision C
Equation 10-4 provides a multiplying factor for operating speed based on actual and
design speed. See Figure 10.5.

        CPS  =  k  i                 VO  1.3              (10-4)
                                     VD  
                                         

Where:  VO = Operating Speed
        VD = Maximum Allowable Design Speed
        k = Constant = 5.00

10.8.3 Contaminant Multiplying Factor

     The contaminant factor, CC, was developed from research performed for the Naval
Air Warfare Center in Warminster, Pennsylvania on the effect of contamination and
filtration level on pump wear and performance. The contamination factor equation is
based on the filtration level as follows:

        CC = 0.6 + 0.05 FAC                               (10-5)

Where: FAC = Filter size, microns

Pumps                              10-15      Revision C
                                       10.0

                                       9.0

Percent Flow Multiplying Factor, C PF  8.0

                                                                                       Ordinary Volute Casing

                                       7.0

                                       6.0

                                       5.0   Modified Volute Casing

                                       4.0

                                       3.0

                                       2.0

                                                                              Displacement

                                       1.0

                                                                                Double Volute Casing

                                       0.0
                                           0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8

                                                                       Pump Capacity, Q / Q r

Q = Actual operating pump flow, gpm
Qr = Specified maximum pump flow, gpm
(See equations in Table 10-3)

                                             Figure 10.4 Percent Flow Multiplying Factor as a Function
                                                                of Pump Capacity and Casing Design
                                                                            (Reference 26)

Pumps                                                                10-16                                     Revision C
Pump Speed Multiplying Factor, C PS  14.0
                                     13.0
                                     12.0
                                     11.0
                                     10.0

                                      9.0
                                      8.0
                                      7.0
                                      6.0
                                      5.0
                                      4.0
                                      3.0
                                      2.0
                                      1.0
                                      0.0

                                           0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0

                                                                                  VO / VD

                                     CPS  =  k  i    VO  1.3
                                                     VD  
                                                         

Where:                               VO = Operating speed
                                     VD = Maximum allowable design speed

                                       k = Constant = 5.00

                                     Figure 10.5 Pump Operating Speed Multiplying Factor

Pumps                                                         10-17       Revision C
     Table 10-3. Equations for Figure 10.5, Percent Flow Multiplying Factor, CPF

Ordinary volute casings:

For 0.1  Qr  1.0:

CPF  = 9.94      -  0.90     Q     -  10.00      Q   2  +  1.77     Q   2
                             Qr                  Qr                 Qr  
                                                                        

     Where: CPF = Percent Flow multiplying factor
                 Q = Actual operating flow, gpm

                 Qr = Maximum pump specified flow, gpm

For 1.0 < Q/Qr < 1.1: CPF = 1.0

For 1.1       Q/Qr  1.7:         CPF  =  -  30.60   +           Q      -         Q    2  -         Q    3
                                                       36.00    Qr        4.50   Qr         2.20   Qr   
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                 

Modified volute casings:

For 0.1  Q/Qr  1.7:

CPF  =  5.31  -  0.55    Q     -  12.00      Q   2  +  12.60    Q   3   -         Q   4  +  0.68    Q   5
                         Qr                  Qr                 Qr         4.63   Qr                Qr  
                                                                                                        

Double volute casings:

CPF  = 1.03   -  0.30    Q     +  0.04     Q   2
                         Qr                Qr  
                                               

Displacement Pumps:

CPF  =  0.80  +          Q   
                    1.1  Qr  
                             
                       

     Pumps                                           10-18                                  Revision C
       Table 10-4. Base Failure Rates for Pump Fluid Drivers (FD,B)

  PUMP TYPE   FLUID DRIVER MODE                  MODEL TYPE              BASE
Centrifugal                                                              RATE*
              - Axial flow impeller           - Closed / open impellers
Displacement                                                               0.20
              - Mixed flow / radial           - Open / semi-open /         0.12
               flow impeller                     closed impellers
                                                                           0.20
              - Peripheral                    - Single stage / multi-
                                                stage                      1.18
              - Reciprocating                                              0.58
              - Reciprocating                  - Piston / plunger          0.4
              - Rotary (single rotor)          - Diaphragm                 1.05
              - Rotary (single rotor)          - Vane                      0.75
              - Rotary (multiple rotor)        - Piston                    0.45
              - Rotary (multiple rotor)        - Gear                      0.58
              - Rotary (multiple rotor)        - Lobe
                                               - Screw

* Failures/million hours of operation

                     Table 10.5 CSF Service Factors

     Duration of     Uniform           Moderate  Heavy                   Extreme
        Service        Load              Shock   Shock                    Shock
                       1.00               1.00
  (hours per day)                                 1.00                      1.25
Occasional (˝ hour)    1.00               1.00
                                                  1.25                      1.50
Less than three        1.00               1.25
hours                  1.25               1.50    1.50                      1.75
                                                  1.75                      2.00
3-10 hours

Over 10 hours

Pumps                                  10-19                             Revision C
10.9 REFERENCES

      In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 10, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of a
pump assembly.

8. Block, H. and D. Johnson, "Downtime Prompts Upgrading of Centrifugal Pumps",
       Chemical Engineering Magazine, pp 35-38 (25 Nov 1985)

19. Hindhede, U., et al, "Machine Design Fundamentals", John Wiley & Sons, NY,
      1983

26 Igor J. Karassik et al, "Pump Handbook", McGraw-Hill Book Company, NY (1986)

39. Shigley, J.E., Mischke, C.R. "Mechanical Engineering Design", McGraw-Hill Book
       Company, NY, (1989)

62. Baumeister, T, et al, Mark's Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers,
       McGraw-Hill Book Company

85. Lev Nelik, "What Happens When a Pump No Longer Operates At Optimum
       Conditions", Pumps and systems, February 2005

86. Allan Budris, Eugine Subini, R. Barry Erickson, "Pump Reliability ­ Correct
       Hydraulic Selection Minimizes Unscheduled Maintenance", PumpLines, Fall 2001

123. Centrifugal Pump & Mechanical Seal Manual, William J. McNally, 2009

Pumps  10-20  Revision C
               11 CHAPTER

                                                FLUID FILTERS

11.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     11.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
        11.1.1 Filtration Mechanisms ............................................................................... 3
        11.1.2 Service Life................................................................................................ 4
        11.1.3 Filter Failure .............................................................................................. 4

     11.2 FILTER FAILURE MODES .............................................................................. 4
     11.3 FLUID CONTAMINATION EFFECTS .............................................................. 6
     11.4 FILTER RELIABILITY MODEL......................................................................... 7

        11.4.1 Base Failure Rate...................................................................................... 9
        11.4.2 Filter Pressure Multiplying Factor .............................................................. 9
        11.4.3 Vibration Multiplying Factor ..................................................................... 10
        11.4.4 Cold Start Multiplying Factor ................................................................... 10
        11.4.5 Cyclic Flow Multiplying Factor ................................................................. 11
     11.5 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 12

11.1 INTRODUCTION

     Fluid filtration equipment is unique in that the reliability of this equipment is more
concerned with the effects of the filter on associated equipment than on the lifetime of
the filter itself. This is due to severe wear of fluid system components which can occur
when these components are operated with poorly filtered fluid. Proper monitoring of
filter reliability can minimize maintenance costs of the overall fluid system through
contamination control of fluid system components caused by abrasive wear. Other
problems in the fluid system that can be prevented by a reliable filter include the
following:

       · Increased internal and external leakage and lower efficiency of pumps,
       actuators, control valves and motors.
       · Sticking of actuators and control valves due to sludge and collection of fine
       particles in critical operational areas.
       · Seizure of components caused by large amounts of contaminants getting stuck
       in clearances.
       · Corrosion within components from acids that form as a result of mixing of
       incompatible particles and fluids.

Filters  11-1  Revision B
     The basic function of a filter is to remove particle contaminants from the fluid that
reduce the service life of system components through abrasive wear. Sources of
contamination that the filter is designed to remove include contaminants present from
the manufacturing and installation process, maintenance procedures, replacement fluid,
environmental contamination, rod seal leakage, breather caps and system component
wear. Cost of a filtration system is a consideration in a fluid system design and there is
an optimum level of cleanliness in any fluid system where increased filtration does not
significantly affect component wear. The acceptable fluid cleanliness level must be
determined for the particular system that will support the reliability requirements of the
complete system.

     The fluid cleanliness level required by a particular fluid system largely determines
the particle blocking size and efficiency rating of the filter. Filters are rated in
accordance with the size of the particles they remove and the efficiency with which they
remove them. This measure of the filter's ability to remove contaminants is called the
filtration ratio or beta () ratio. This ratio is defined as the number of particles of a
specified size (and larger) upstream of the filter relative to the number of particles of the
same size downstream of the filter. Beta ratio can be written as follows:

         x  =   number of particles of size x and larger upstream of the filter
               number of particles of size x and larger downstream of the filter

Filter performance may also be expressed as beta efficiency in %.

% = number of particles of size x upstream - number of particles of size x downstream
                                number of particles of size x upstream

     Another performance parameter to be considered in a reliability review is the
particle penetration which is the percentage of particles that are not captured by the
filter. These filter performance ratings will be based on laboratory tests and the
expected operational reliability of the filter must therefore consider the operating
environment of the system containing the filter. Filter reliability will depend on several
parameters including the strength of the porous filter media with respect to contaminant
loading under system fluid conditions, fluid pressure surges and cold start-ups.

     This chapter will review the conditions which can lead to degradation or failure of
the filter. Because a reliability review of the filter is focused on protecting other
components in the system from contamination, the effect of contamination on the wear
of various components is discussed. A failure rate equation for the filter assembly itself
will then be developed.

Filters        11-2                                                Revision B
11.1.1 Filtration Mechanisms

     Filters consist of a porous filter media through which fluid is passed. The filter
media is typically corrugated to increase the amount of filtration area within the filter
volume. Filtration of gases is accomplished by absorption of suspended particles.
Filtration of liquids is primarily accomplished by direct interception of the suspended
particles. A typical pressure line filter is shown in Figure 11.1.

                                 Figure 11.1 Typical Filter Construction

     Filters are often placed in the return line of the fluid system as opposed to the
pressure side since if the reservoir and the fluid it contains start out clean and all fluid
entering the reservoir and returning fluid is adequately filtered, then fluid cleanliness will
be maintained. Also the pressure across the filter will be less than that upstream of the
components yet sufficient to force fluid through the filter media.

     Another consideration of operational reliability is the continuous monitoring of filter
pressure drop providing early warning of component failures or filter failure. For
example, if the pressure across the filter suddenly increases, this could be an indication
of imminent failure of a component upstream. Similarly, a sudden decrease in pressure
across the filter could indicate a rupture of the filter element. Continuous monitoring of
the filter can provide clues as to the performance of the filter and the condition of the
fluid system.

Filters  11-3  Revision B
11.1.2 Service Life

     The porous structure of a filter media presents a resistance to fluid flow which
causes a pressure drop across the filter. This filter differential pressure increases as
captured particles or contaminants are collected and plug the porous media. Every
system has a maximum differential pressure at which the filter must be cleaned or
replaced. The filter service life is the time it takes the filter to reach the maximum
allowable differential pressure. Use of the filter beyond its service life could result in
catastrophic failure of the filter due to the high differential pressure or it could result in
unfiltered fluid bypassing the filter (Reference 33).

11.1.3 Filter Failure

     A filter is considered to have failed when it releases previously captured
contaminants, when it allows unfiltered fluid to pass throughout the filter media, or when
the filter collapses and contaminates the fluid with contents of the filter media. Plugging
of the filter with contaminants, with a resulting increase in filter differential pressure, can
be a normal consequence of operation. Failure due to premature plugging can occur for
several reasons as described in Section 11.2. Failure of the filter can be caused by
operating conditions such as high differential pressures, cyclic flow, vibration, system
startups when cold, and even by the fluid that is being filtered if the fluid is incompatible
with the filter. Typically, 67% of filter failures are due to leakage and 33% are due to
clogging.

11.2 FILTER FAILURE MODES

     Typical failure modes and causes for filter assemblies are summarized in Table 11-
1. Some of the more common failure modes causing performance degradation of the
filter are described as follows:

     Channeling: Excessively high differential pressures can cause filter media pores to
enlarge, allowing large amounts of unfiltered fluid to bypass the filter media.
Enlargement of the media pores also allows previously captured contaminants to be
released. Channeling can also be the result of media fatigue caused by cyclic flow
conditions. Cyclic flow is caused by the periodic increase and decrease of system
pressure such as from pump ripple creating a wave form of fluid flow through the filter.

     Fatigue Cracks: Cyclic flow conditions in the fluid system can also cause fatigue
cracks in the filter media. Such cracks may occur at the roots of pleats in corrugated
filters or within the volume of loose packed media. The cracks will allow the release of
contaminants from the filter and will allow some of the fluid to bypass the filter.

Filters  11-4  Revision B
                       Table 11-1. Failure Modes of Filters

  FAILURE MODE         FAILURE CAUSE                       FAILURE EFFECTS
Channeling
Fatigue cracks         - High differential pressures       - Release of contaminants
Media Migration        - Cyclic flow                       - Circulation of unfiltered
Filter disintegration
Plugging                                                     fluid

                       - Cyclic flow                       - Circulation of unfiltered
                                                             fluid

                                                           - Release of filter media

                       - Vibration                         - Release of filter media
                       - Cyclic flow
                       - Cold starts

                       - Embrittlement                     - Substantial contamination
                       - Cold starts                         of fluid with filter media
                       - High differential pressures

                       - Condensed moisture                - Increase in filter differential
                       - Oil saturated with contaminants   pressure, definition of failure
                       - Absorption of oxidation products  dependent on system design
                       - Absorption of coolant             and maintenance schedule
                       - Accumulation of wear debris

       Media Migration: Improper bonding of the media fibers or deterioration of the
bonding can result in the down stream release of media fibers. This downstream
release of the filter media is termed media migration. Media migration during vibration
of the filter may result from an improper fit of the filter in the filter housing or may result
from the filter media abrading against the filter casing. Media migration can also occur
in conjunction with fatigue cracks in the media, as caused by cyclic flow conditions.
Media migration can also occur during cold temperature start-ups due to potential large
differential pressure generated as a consequence of increased fluid viscosity.

     Filter Disintegration: Complete disintegration of the filter can occur as a result of
extremely high differential pressures. Disintegration can also be the result of
embrittlement of the filter media from exposure to incompatible fluids or cold
temperatures.

     Plugging: Filter plugging can be caused by normal equipment operation or by filter
failure, depending upon when the filter becomes plugged. Failure due to premature
plugging can be attributed to several causes other than just the accumulation of wear

Filters                               11-5                   Revision B
debris such as the saturation of the fluid being filtered by contaminants or moisture
combining with fluid additives to form thick filter-plugging gels.

11.3 FLUID CONTAMINATION EFFECTS

     Contamination of the operating fluid with hard particles can cause progressive
performance deterioration throughout the fluid system through an abrasive wear
mechanism. This type of wear is characterized by a particle penetrating a softer surface
and cutting away material. The rate of wear and thus the rate of performance
degradation is dependent on the number of particles and the particle hardness. Particle
contamination can also cause cumulative performance degradation where a rapid
decline in performance follows an extended period of apparently normal operations.
This type of degradation failure is caused by the creation of surface defects during
operation. These surface defects may be caused by abrasion, surface fatigue or
adhesion wear processes.

     Fluid systems requiring filtration typically include components such as pumps,
gears, control valves, ball bearings, roller bearings, journal bearings, and seals. Their
potential effect on contamination of the fluid system can be described as follows
(Reference 7): The following failure modes can be eliminated by effective filtering.

     Pumps: In displacement-type piston pumps, the piston face can be damaged by
cavitation or corrosion. Contaminant particles can enter the lubricant film between the
piston and cylinder and plough the surface several times before being ejected. In
swashplate controlled devices, such as variable displacement pumps and hydraulic
motors, the piston shoes can cause abrasion-wear-type degradation failures as the
shoes are highly loaded and are in sliding contact with the swashplate. Similar
abrasive-wear-type degradation failures can occur to the sliding contact surfaces of the
rotating cylinder block and the mating valve pressure plates.

     Gears: Gear failures are primarily failures of the gear tooth surface. This surface is
damaged by rubbing wear, scoring and pitting. Rubbing wear is generated by both
adhesive and abrasive wear mechanisms. Scoring of the tooth surface is generated by
the adhesive wear type mechanisms under intense local frictional heating. Pitting
occurs as a result of tooth surface fatigue wear. These three wear mechanisms are all
aggravated by contaminate particles.

     Valves: Particle contamination can cause increased leakage in control valves by
severe cutting or by milder abrasive wear mechanisms. Synthetic phosphate ester
fluids have been found to cause servo valve erosion by the corrosion process. A brittle
corrosion layer is formed on the valve and is abraded by fluid-borne particles, adding
additional particulates to the fluid and exposing base metal, allowing further corrosion.
Deterioration failures of relief valves can occur from particle contamination caused by
erosion. Contamination of hydraulic fluid by water has been shown to cause rust

Filters  11-6  Revision B
inhibitor additive to attach to servo valve spools and prevent movement of the valve
spool within its housing.

     Bearings: Hard particle contamination of ball and roller bearing lubricants is the
cause of two types of abrasive wear of the rolling surfaces. Hard particle contamination
causes rolling surface damage that dominates the fatigue life of ball bearings under
typical operating conditions. In severe circumstances, hard particle contamination
causes indentations and pits which cause rapid failure of the rolling surfaces. Abrasive
wear, increasing with particle concentration and hardness, can remove material from
the sliding edges of a tapered rolling bearing, reducing the bearing width and allowing
increased misalignment. Wear of this type does not stop until the contaminant size is
reduced to less than the lubricant film thickness.

     The performance of new journal bearings improves with use initially due to better
surface conformity caused by wear during boundary lubrication conditions. As wear in
the contact region progresses, the performance begins to gradually deteriorate. Wear
of the journal bearings is caused by both abrasive and adhesive wear due to the sliding
motion in the contact region. Contamination of the lubricant with water can cause the
formation of a metal oxide boundary layer on the bearing which can inhibit adhesive
wear. However, abrasion of this film can cause bearing failure due to rapid increases in
wear, bearing corrosion, and the number of abrasive oxide particles. Maximum bearing
life can be achieved by selecting a filter to filter out all particles larger than the minimum
lubricating film thickness.

     Seals: Seal failures are typically caused by fatigue-like surface embrittlement,
abrasive removal of material, and corrosion. Elastomeric seals are more sensitive to
thermal deterioration than to mechanical wear. However, hard particles can become
embedded in soft elastomeric materials and sliding contact metal surfaces, causing
leakage by abrasive wear of the harder mating surfaces. Abrasive particles can also
plug lubricant passages which causes seal failure from the lack of lubricant.

     Actuators: Clearances between the actuator piston and cylinder are critical to
achieve the required axial force required upon actuation. Hard particles between this
clearance will cause early abrasive wear and early failure. Small particles entering this
clearance will cause the piston to stick and poor response performance of the actuator.

11.4 FILTER RELIABILITY MODEL

     The filter manufacturer may provide a filter life expectancy based on various ISO
multi-pass tests. These tests are conducted under steady state conditions. Use of the
life expectancy based on these tests would assume the following:

Filters  11-7  Revision B
     (1) The rate of generation of contaminate particulates by system components and
the rate of ingestion of environmental contaminates do not vary with time and the
particulates are evenly mixed within the system fluid.

     (2) The system fluid volume and flow rates do not change with time.

     (3) The filter will not plug or become unusually restricted prior to reaching its
maximum capacity.

     These conditions do not exist in normal fluid system operation. While the published
life expectancy of the filter can be used to determine a base failure rate, this rate needs
to be modified with multiplying factors that consider a variable flow and pressure drop
across the filter to adjust the base failure rate to actual operating conditions.

     A typical fluid system consists of a reservoir, pump, filter, one or more control
valves, and one or more fluid motors. A simplified system is shown in Figure 11.2.

         Figure 11.2 Simplified Fluid System Containing Filter

     The complete filter failure rate model needs to have correction factors to modify the
base failure and to account for potentially degrading effects of operating conditions.
Considering the causes of failures as earlier discussed, the failure rate model can be
written as:

         F = F ,B i CDP i CV i CCS i CCF                        (11-1)

Filters  11-8                             Revision B
Where:     F = Failure rate of the filter in failures/million hours

         F,B = Base failure rate of the filter in failures/million hours (See Section

                   11.4.1)

         CDP = Multiplying factor which considers the effects of the filter

                   differential pressure on the base failure rate (See Section 11.4.2)

          CV = Multiplying factor which considers the effects of vibration on

                  the base failure rate (See Section 11.4.3)

         CCS = Multiplying factor which considers the effects of cold start-up

                   conditions on the base failure rate (See Section 11.4.4)

         CCF = Multiplying factor which considers the effects of cyclic flow on the

                   base failure rate (See Section 11.4.5)

11.4.1 Base Failure Rate

     The mass of contaminant particles retained by the filter determines the life of the
filter. However, by definition, a clogged filter is not normally classified as a component
failure. See Table 11-1 for a list of typical failure modes. The filter manufacturer may
provide a filter life expectancy based on various ISO multi-pass tests. This life
expectancy in hours ( ) can be converted to a base failure rate ( = 1/ ). A typical
value for a base failure rate obtained from various data sources is given as 2.53 failures
per million operating hours. Typically, the failure rate distribution will be 67% of the
failures due to internal leakage and 33% of the failures due to plugging. For a more
detailed analysis, the following paragraphs describe the multiplying factors to be used in
conjunction with this base failure rate.

         F,BB = Base failure rate of a filter in normal operation                (11-2)

                 = 2.53 failures/million hours or as obtained from manufacturer

11.4.2 Filter Pressure Multiplying Factor

     The probability of particulate unloading increases with increased differential
pressure. As this pressure is increased, media pores within the filter media are
enlarged allowing unfiltered fluid to pass through the filter. Extremely high pressures
can cause the filter to completely disintegrate adding more contaminates into the
system. During a reliability review of the fluid system, the tensile strength of the filter
media needs to be considered in relation to system pressure.

Filters                   11-9  Revision B
     A multiplying factor to consider the effects of system pressure on the base failure
rate can be written as follows:

         CDP  = 1.25  PO                                                 (11-3)
                      PR

Where:   PO = Operating upstream filter pressure
         PR = Rated filter pressure

11.4.3 Vibration Multiplying Factor

     Most filters are tested for media migration caused by vibration. A typical test is
performed with the filter immersed in the system fluid and the filter is exposed to low
amplitude, high frequency vibrations for about 100,000 cycles. As a result, most filters
will not degrade due to vibration. However, in aircraft environments, failure of the filter
housing and seals due to vibration accounts for 80 percent of the total filter failure rate
(Reference 15). Thus it appears that in most systems vibration is not a problem, but in
aircraft and vehicle systems excessive vibration can cause filter failure. As a result:

            CV = 1.25 for aircraft and mobile systems

            CV = 1.00 for all other systems

11.4.4 Cold Start Multiplying Factor

     The correction factor for cold start degradation can be calculated using a ratio of the
cold start fluid viscosity to the normal operating fluid viscosity. This is:

                                             x                           (11-4)
               CCS = 
                                      cold start

                                       normal

 Where: cold start = Viscosity at cold start temperature, lb-min/in2
          normal = Viscosity at normal operating conditions, lb-min/in2

                  x = Exponent which varies with type of fluid

Filters                               11-10       Revision B
   Values for  and x can be obtained from Table 11-3. As shown in this table, values

for x will range from 0.20 for light viscous fluids such as kerosene to 1.1 for heavy

viscous fluids such as SAE 70 oil.

11.4.5 Cyclic Flow Multiplying Factor

     Filtration performance will decrease as a function of increasing fluid flow as
pressure increases and the filtration ratio () will be reduced in relation to the magnitude
of the flow surge. Particle penetration is the percentage of particles that are not
captured by the filter. Cyclic flow conditions result in an increase in particle penetration.
This increase occurs after contaminants have collected on the filter. A filter that has a
uniform and fixed pore size and depends on direct interception or mechanical blockage
as the primary capture mechanism tends to hold on to particles during variable flow. A
non-uniform filter medium, which is normally thicker and depends on adsorption
(particles sticking to fibers) for contaminant capture, has a tendency to release particles
in the presence of variable flow and resultant flow surges.

     A multiplying factor to adjust the base failure rate to consider cyclic flow can be
determined from the following table:

         Table 11-2 Cyclic Flow Multiplying Factor, CCF

         Filter type        Surge Frequency  CCF

         Uniform pore size  0 ­ 0.1 Hz       1.0

                            0.1 ­ 0.5 Hz     1.2

         Non-uniform pore   0 ­ 0.1 Hz       1.2

         size               0.1 ­ 0.5 Hz     1.5

Filters                     11-11                        Revision B
                       Table 11-3. Viscosity of Fluids

Liquid          0 C 20 C      Viscosity in Centistokes, 

                                                                           x

                             40 C 60 C 80 C 100 C 125 C 150 C

Water           1.8 1.0      0.75 0.56 0.35 0.28                        0.2

Sea water       1.9 1.1      0.87                                       0.2

Gasoline, 0.68  0.51   0.42  0.35 0.30                                  0.3
s.g.

Kerosene,       3.7 2.3      1.6 1.2 0.96                               0.2
0.81 s.g.

Light                        34    16 8.7 5.4                           0.2
lubricating oil, 390 96
0.91 s.g.

Heavy                        123   43     20  10                        0.7
lubricating oil, 3492 500
0.91 s.g.

SAE 10 oil      555 122      41    14 8.7 5.4 3.3 2.2 0.5

SAE 20 oil      1141 213     65    22     11  6.8 4.4 2.8 0.6

SAE 30 oil      2282   358   101   33     15  9.4 5.5 3.6 0.7
SAE 40 oil      4640   624
SAE 50 oil      8368   1179  137   51     26  13        7.8 5.0 0.8
SAE 60 oil      15215  2206
                             251   76     32  17        9.5 6.4 0.9

                             380 107 38       20        11  7.5 1.0

SAE 70 oil      23203 2853   456 137 49       25        14  8.5 1.1

11.5 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 11, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of fluid
filter assemblies.

7. Bishop, F.E. and William M. Needleman, "The Effects of Fluid Contamination on
       Component Wear", Pall Corporation

Filters                            11-12                    Revision B
15. "Fabrication and Testing of Lightweight Hydraulic System Simulator Hardware ­
       Phase II", Report No. NADC-79024-60, prepared by Rockwell International,
       Columbus, Ohio for Naval Air Systems Command, Washington, DC

23. Hubert, Christopher J., John W. Beck and John H. Johnson, "A Model and the
       Methodology for Determining Wear Particle Generation Rate and Filter Efficiency
       in a Diesel Engine Using Ferrography", Society of Automotive Engineers, Paper
       No. 821195 (1982)

24. Hudgens, R.D. and L.B. Feldhaus, "Diesel Engine Lube Filter Life Related to Oil
       Chemistry", Society of Automotive Engineers, Paper No. 780974 (1978)

33. Needleman, William M., "Filtration for Wear Control", in Wear Control Handbook,
      M.B. Peterson and W. O. Winer, Section 4, American Society of Mechanical
      Engineers, New York, (1980)

39. Shigley, J.E., Mischke, C.R., Mechanical Engineering Design, McGraw-Hill Book
       Company, New York (1989)

Filters  11-13  Revision B
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Filters  11-14                               Revision B
                           12 CHAPTER

                     BRAKES AND CLUTCHES

12.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     12.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
     12.2 FRICTION MATERIALS................................................................................... 2
     12.3 BRAKES .......................................................................................................... 5

        12.3.1 Brake Assemblies...................................................................................... 5
        12.3.2 Brake Varieties .......................................................................................... 6
        12.3.3 Brake Assembly Failure Modes................................................................. 7
        12.3.4 Brake Failure Rate Model.......................................................................... 8
        12.3.5 Disk / Brake Lining Reliability Model ....................................................... 10

           12.3.5.1 Base Failure Rate for Brake Lining / Disk Material ........................... 11
           12.3.5.2 Brake Type Multiplying Factor .......................................................... 12
           12.3.5.3 Dust Contaminant Multiplying Factor ................................................ 12
           12.3.5.4 Temperature Multiplying Factor ........................................................ 13
     12.4 CLUTCHES ................................................................................................... 13
        12.4.1 Clutch Assemblies................................................................................... 13
        12.4.2 Clutch Varieties ....................................................................................... 14
        12.4.3 Clutch Assembly Failure Modes .............................................................. 15
        12.4.4 Clutch Failure Rate Model ....................................................................... 15
        12.4.5 Clutch Friction Material Reliability Model................................................. 17
           12.4.5.1 Base Failure Rate for Clutch Lining / Disk Material........................... 18
           12.4.5.2 Clutch Plate Quantity Multiplying Factor ........................................... 18
           12.4.5.3 Temperature Multiplying Factor ........................................................ 19
     12.5 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 20

12.1 INTRODUCTION

     The principal function of a brake or clutch assembly is to convert kinetic energy to
heat and then either to absorb or dissipate heat while simultaneously (through energy
transfer) reducing the relative movement between the friction material and the part to
which it is engaged. Reliability models for brakes and clutches are presented together
in this Handbook because of similar design and operational characteristics; and
because one of the most important functional parts of each of these components is the
friction material. A discussion of friction materials to achieve the energy transfer

Brakes and Clutches  12-1  Revision C
common to both brakes and clutches is included in Section 12.2. Section 12.3
addresses the brake model, which includes actuators, springs, friction linings, bearings,
seals and housings. An analysis of the energy transfer materials which are common to
both brakes and clutches is included in the brake model. Section 12.4 outlines and
describes the reliability model for clutches, which includes the following components:
actuators, bearings, friction linings, seals and springs.

12.2 FRICTION MATERIALS

     As stated in the introduction, the major functional components of brake equipment
and clutch equipment are the friction materials. The reliability of brakes and clutches is
concerned with the wear of these friction materials. For brake assemblies, the friction
lining provides the friction necessary to slow down or stop a vehicle or other machinery.
Friction materials used in clutches are placed in the power-transmission system to
couple it together so it rotates as one unit. Table 12-1 provides a list of friction material
types and applications.

                     Table 12-1. Friction Material Types And Applications
                                                 (Reference 32)

TYPE                 MANUFACTURE                            APPLICATION

Woven cotton         Closely woven belt of fabric is        Industrial drum brakes, mine
                     impregnated with resins which are      equipment, cranes, lifts
                     then polymerized

Woven asbestos       Open woven belt of fabric is           Industrial band and drum brakes,
                     impregnated with resins which are      cranes, lifts, excavators, winches,
                     then polymerized. May contain wire     concrete mixers, mine equipment
                     to scour the surface

Molded flexible      Asbestos fiber and friction modifiers  Industrial drum brakes; heavy
Semi-flexible rigid  mixed with thermo-setting polymer      duty brakes, excavators, tractors,
                     and mixture heated under pressure      presses

Sintered metal       Iron and/or copper powders mixed       Heavy duty brakes and clutches,
                     with friction modifiers                press brakes, earthmoving
                                                            equipment

Cermets              Similar to sintered metal pads, but    Heavy duty brakes and clutches,
                     large portion of ceramic material      press brakes, earthmoving
                     present                                equipment

Brakes and Clutches  12-2                                   Revision C
     Friction materials that are used in brake and clutch linings have severe performance
requirements. The necessary energy conversion must be accomplished with a minimum
of wear on the contacting parts. For a particular type of brake or clutch, the amount of
heat and friction generated varies according to 5 conditions: (1) the amount of pressure
applied between the sliding surfaces, (2) the operating environment, (3) the roughness
of the surfaces, (4) the material from which the surfaces are made, and (5) the
frequency of application.

     The reliability of these high energy components is important for a variety of reasons
including economy, operational readiness and, most important, safety. In today's
modern machinery and equipment, a vast number of friction materials have become
available to fulfill the very diverse requirements of this equipment group.

     In design it is necessary to have equations for the prediction of the wear life of
clutches and brakes. Lining wear properties are generally considered in terms of
system life under several different conditions of use severity. Consequently, lining life is
often the last performance character to be quantified. Thus, knowledge of lining wear
behavior from laboratory testing can be of great value.

     Friction modifier additives, such as cashew resin, graphite, etc. have been used for
many years in order to control friction properties in brake and clutch composites.
Friction composites are composed of a balanced mixture of resin plus additives and
generally contain over a dozen ingredients in order to achieve desired characteristics.

     Friction materials containing conventional organic binding agents exhibit poor
frictional stability under varying temperature conditions. The thermal degradation of
such binders results in inferior frictional characteristics, giving rise to fade and often
resulting in increased wear. Furthermore, organic materials, particularly resins, tend to
have a short shelf life, and are not always easy to reproduce.

     Friction materials commonly consist of sintered lead bronzes and iron powders with
additions of dry lubricants and so-called friction reinforcers. Graphite and molybdenum
disulfide, for example, are suitable as dry lubricants. However, ceramic additives and
minerals, such as quartz and corundum, may be used to increase the coefficient of
friction. By appropriate variation in the additives it is possible to make adaptations for
all applications, particularly concerning the coefficient of friction.

     Semi-metallics rely heavily on iron, steel, and graphite substitutions for the organic
and asbestos materials. Some organic components are, however, used to obtain
desirable properties. The use of abrasives must be minimized to maintain acceptable
mating surface compatibility. Semi-metallics have distinct advantages over
conventional organics including:

· Improved frictional stability and fade resistance

Brakes and Clutches  12-3                            Revision C
             · Excellent compatibility with rotors and high temperature wear resistance
             · High performance with minimal noise

     The cost of raw material mix represents the major factor in the premium prices of
semi-metallics, and as such, widespread use of semi-metallics is not found. Metallic
linings withstand more severe loads, higher temperatures, and have less tendency to
fade. Sintered metallic-ceramic friction materials have successfully been used for
specialized applications such as jet aircraft.

     Reliability of the total brake of clutch assembly is directly related to performance of
the friction material used for the particular design. Table 12-2 is a summary of failure
modes for the brake or clutch friction material surface.

                    Table 12-2. Friction Material Failure Modes (Reference 32)

   FAILURE           CHARACTERISTICS                       CAUSES
     MODE
               Heavy gouging resulting in rapid lining     Material rubbing against a heat
Heat spotting  wear                                        spotted metal member
Crazing                                                    Overheating of the braking
Scoring        Randomly oriented cracks on the friction    surface
Fade           material, resulting in a high wear rate     Metal member needs regrinding

Metal pick-up  Grooves formed on the friction material,    Overheating caused by
Grab           resulting in a reduction of life            excessive braking
Strip braking
               Material degrades or flows at the friction  Unsuitable combination of
Neglect        surface, resulting in a temporary loss of   materials
Misalignment   performance                                 Incorrect radiusing of lining

               Metal from the mating member embedded       Distortion of the brake path
               in the lining
                                                           Failure to provide required
               Lining contacting at ends only giving high  maintenance
               servo effect and erratic performance        Lining not fitted correctly to
                                                           the shoe platform
               Braking over a small strip of the rubbing
               path giving localized heating and
               preferential wear at those areas

               Material completely worn off the shoe
               reducing performance

               Excessive grooving wear at preferential
               areas of lining surface

Brakes and Clutches  12-4                                  Revision C
12.3 BRAKES

12.3.1 Brake Assemblies

     The reliability of a brake system is dependent on the reliability of its component
parts, which may include: actuators, bearings, friction linings, housings, seals, and
springs. With the exception of friction linings, all of these component parts are
addressed in earlier sections of this handbook. The characteristics of these parts that
are peculiar to the braking environment will be discussed in this chapter. The reliability
of brake components is sensitive to friction materials used in their assembly and a
review of brake reliability should consider the friction material failure modes addressed
in the previous section.

     Brakes are called upon to convert large amounts of kinetic energy to thermal energy
in a very short time. The life of currently used brake lining materials is determined by
wear, which in turn is strongly dependent on the temperature experienced by these
materials during sliding. This temperature dependence is due largely to softening of the
metal binder (usually copper or iron) present in brake lining composite materials.

     Some of the systems which use brakes include passenger cars, light trucks,
tractors, buses, agricultural equipment, construction equipment, industrial equipment,
railroad trains and aircraft. Brake lining materials used in passenger cars and light
trucks fall into two categories: drum brake segments, which are less than 3/4" thick, and
disk brake pads. Brake systems used by trucks, buses, truck tractors and trailer
combinations are air assisted hydraulic (air brake) systems.

     Industrial equipment encompasses all equipment used in fixed facility or buildings
such as overhead cranes or hoists. Hydraulic brake systems used in agricultural and
construction equipment are of either the dry or the wet brake type. Dry brakes are the
conventional types of a drum or disk system. Wet brakes use drum and disk brake
assemblies but the friction material is in a fluid environment. This type of brake exhibits
decreased heat build up and subsequently less fade, reduced lining and drum or rotor
wear and improved reliability.

     Most railroad trains rely on two braking systems, a dynamic brake and a friction
brake. Most self-propelled rail cars have a dynamic brake, which is used either
independently or together with the train's friction braking system down to about 5-10
mph, using complete friction braking for the last distance to a complete stop.

     The use of organic friction materials in aircraft brakes is currently limited primarily to
small general aviation aircraft. The trend in larger aircraft brake materials has been
toward higher energy absorption per unit mass of brake materials. On larger aircraft
organic friction materials have been replaced by more expensive copper and iron-based

Brakes and Clutches  12-5  Revision C
metallics. The use of disk brakes, with one brake for each of the main landing gears is
common.

12.3.2 Brake Varieties

     There are numerous brake system types, each with their own parts and reliability
characteristics. The various types of brake systems and methods of actuation are listed
in Table 12-3.

                                     Table 12-3. Methods of Actuation
                                                   (Reference 32)

    TYPE              ADVANTAGES                           DISADVANTAGES
Mechanical
            - Robust, simple operation        - Large leverage needed
             provides good control            - Potential frictional losses at pins and
                                               pivots
Pneumatic   - Large forces available
Hydraulic                                     - Compressed air supply needed
            - Compact                         - Brake chambers may be bulky
Electrical  - Large forces available
            - Quick response and good         - Special fluid needed
             control                          - Temperatures must not be high

            - Suitable for automatic control    enough to vaporize fluid
            - Quick response                  - Potential seal problems

                                              - Limited to On-off operations

     Specific design examples of brake systems include the following:

     Band Brakes ­ Band brakes are simpler and less expensive than most other
braking devices. Component parts include a friction band element and the actuation
levers. Band brakes are characterized by uneven lining wear and poor heat dissipation.

     Externally and Internally Pivoted Drum Brakes ­ Internal expanding and external
contracting drum brakes are simple designs requiring relatively little maintenance. They
may become self-locking with extreme wear if not properly designed. Internal types offer
more protection from foreign material.

     Linearly Acting External and Internal Drum Brakes - These brakes are fitted with
shoes that, when activated, approach the drum by moving parallel to a radius through
the center of the shoe. Springs between the friction materials may separate both shoes
when the brake is released. Lining wear is more uniform in comparison with internal
drum brakes.

Brakes and Clutches                     12-6  Revision C
     Dry and Wet Disk Brakes - Disk brakes have two main advantages over drum
brakes: better heat dissipation and more uniform braking action. However, disk brakes
require a larger actuation force due to higher moments of inertia. Both annular and pad
type disk brakes include friction materials, springs, actuators, housings, seals, and
bearings. Wet disk brakes may operate in an oil bath. Thus, these brakes are isolated
from dirt and water, and the circulation of the oil through a heat exchanger usually
provides greater heat dissipation than direct air cooling.

     Magnetic Particle, Hysteresis, and Eddy-Current Brakes - In all three of these
brake types the braking torque is developed from electromagnetic reactions rather than
mechanical friction, and therefore requires a source of electrical power.

12.3.3 Brake Assembly Failure Modes

     A list of failure modes for a typical brake system is included in Table 12-4. The
brake system friction materials are sacrificial replacements. Because friction linings are
designed to wear out before the life of the vehicle or machinery, brake lining service life
is a better measure of its durability with lining replacement counted as a maintenance
action as opposed to an equipment failure. However, if replacement is required prior to
service life, then the friction lining would be determined a failure.

                        Table 12-4. Brake System Failure Modes
                                            (Reference 9)

    FAILURE MODE             FAILURE CAUSE            FAILURE EFFECT
Sticking piston         Contamination        Low output pressure
Leaking cylinder        Contamination        Low output pressure
Broken/weak spring      Fatigue activation   Unable to adjust pressure
Sticking bleeder valve  Contamination        Inadequate dissipation of air
Deteriorated lining     Aged/heat            Exposed metal-on-metal contact
                                             reduces arresting capability
Worn bearing            Lack of lubrication  Low rotary motion
Worn seals              Aged                 External leakage
Cracked housing         Vibration, fatigue   External leakage

Brakes and Clutches     12-7                                    Revision C
     In brake systems the rubbing elements include the friction material and a
countersurface. The friction material is the sacrificial element, although the essence of
good brake design is to minimize wear. The countersurface is usually metallic, to
provide structure and to dissipate the frictional heat. Most countersurfaces are a cast
iron drum or disc. In a few applications, steel rubbing surfaces are used. The
countersurface is also nominally a non-wearing surface. Countersurfaces typically wear
less than ten percent of the total volume worn from the friction interface (Reference 16).
Descriptions of the countersurface failure characteristics are included in Table 12-5.

                     Table 12-5. Metal Countersurface Failures
                                         (Reference 32)

    FAILURE          CHARACTERISTICS                      CAUSES
      MODE
                     Often cracks are formed in these     Friction material not sufficiently
Heat spotting        regions owing to structural changes  conformable to the metal member
                     in the metal.
Crazing
                     Randomly oriented cracks             Overheating and repeated stress
Scoring                                                   cycling

                     Scratches in the line of movement    Metal too soft for friction material.

                                                          Abrasive debris embedded in the
                                                          lining material.

12.3.4 Brake Failure Rate Model

     To determine the failure rate for a particular brake system, the brake system needs
to be reduced to its component parts. Brake systems will normally contain some
combination of the following components:

             · Actuators
             · Springs
             · Brake friction linings
             · Bearings
             · Seals
             · Housings

Brakes and Clutches  12-8                                       Revision C
     The total brake system failure rate is the sum of the failure rates of each of the
above component parts in the system:

                     BR = AC + SP + FR + BE + SE + HO              (12-1)

Where:  BR = Total failure rate for the brake system, failures/million hours

        AC = Total failure rate for actuators, failures/million hours

                 (See Chapter 9)

        SP = Total failure rate for springs, failures/million hours

                 (See Chapter 4)

        FR = Total failure rate for brake friction materials, failures/million

                  hours (See Section 12.3.5)

        BE = Total failure rate for bearings, failures/million hours

                 (See Chapter 7)

        SE = Total failure rate for seals, failure/million hours

                 (See Chapter 3)

        HO = Total failure rate for brake housing, 3.0 failures/million hours,

                 from Navy Maintenance and Material Management
                 Information System and miscellaneous data sources

     In the hydraulic drives of brake systems, seals are used to prevent leakage of brake
fluid. The hardness and swelling of the seals, when exposed to brake fluid, must
remain within limits such that the seals will give reliable operation.

     The reliability of springs associated with brake systems is generally very high when
compared to other components. Some of the spring assemblies in a brake system may
be static, maintaining a constant tension on a part, other springs may be cyclic or
dynamic depending on their function.

     Severe performance requirements may affect the reliability of the bearings if there is
a path of heat conduction from the friction surface to the bearings. This conduction may
cause a decrease in the operating viscosity of the bearing lubricant and, consequently,
a reduction in bearing life. A lubricant with a sufficiently high temperature rating should
prevent leakage or excessive wear.

     The reliability of brake actuators normally is very high. Under severe brake
performance, conditions of increased temperature and excessive vibration may
decrease the reliability of the actuator.

Brakes and Clutches  12-9                              Revision C
     Refer to the appropriate chapters of this Handbook for the reliability models for
individual parts comprising the brake assembly. In some cases the result in
failure/million cycles will need to be converted to failures/million hours by multiplying by
the number of cycles per hour.

12.3.5 Disk / Brake Lining Reliability Model

     There are several factors that affect the wear rate of friction components of brakes,
including:

         (a) nominal pressure
         (b) elastic properties of the materials
         (c) strength properties of the materials
         (d) surface roughness of the mating surfaces
         (e) temperature of the material
         (f) compatibility of the lining/drum or disk/pad materials

     The wear of the brake lining or disk pad material can be determined with the
following equation (Reference 77):

                     V = ko P s                                               (12-2)

Where:  V = Volume of material lost by wear, in3

        ko = Wear coefficient, (lb/in2) -1 (See Table 12-8)
        P = Applied load, lbf
        s = Sliding distance during braking, in = vs i tb
        vs = Sliding velocity, in/sec
        tb = Braking time, sec

    If the effective thickness of the lining or pad is d (inches), pad life is commonly given

by the following linear relationship:

                     Life = d                                                 (12-3)
                             Wp

Where:  Life = Number of applications before friction material is completely
               worn

        d = Lining thickness, in

        Wp = Pad wear per application, in

Brakes and Clutches              12-10                       Revision C
Equation (12-2) can be written in terms of surface pad/lining wear per application:

                                   Wp  =  ko  P vs   tb                    (12-4)
                                                A

where:                             A = Brake lining area, in2
and:

                     FR,B =   1    =   Wp     =  ko P vs tb                (12-5)
                             Life       d            dA

     For the purpose of compatibility with the other models developed for mechanical
components, the lining life will be converted to a rate of failure. By normalizing Equation
(12-5) to those values for which historical failure rate data are available, the following
failure rate model can be derived:

                                   FR = FR,B i CBT i CRD i CT              (12-6)

Where: FR = Failure rate of the brake friction material in failures/million hours

         FR,B = Base failure rate of the brake friction material, failures/million

                         hours (See Section 12.3.5.1)

            CBT = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of brake type

                         on the base failure rate (See Section 12.3.5.2)

            CRD = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of dust contaminants

                         on the base failure rate (See Section 12.3.5.3)

             CT = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of ambient

                         temperature on the base failure rate (See Section 12.3.5.4)

12.3.5.1 Base Failure Rate for Brake Lining / Disk Material

   The brake friction material base failure rate, FR,B,B may be provided by the lining

manufacturer. If not, the base rate can be calculated from Equation (12-5). Wear

coefficients are included in Table 12-8. It should be noted that FR,BB from a

manufacturer may be in terms of brake actuations. During a single brake actuation the

Brakes and Clutches                           12-11            Revision C
vehicle wheel or industrial machine will rotate several rotations during the stopping or
slowing process.

12.3.5.2 Brake Type Multiplying Factor

     A typical disk brake will wear better than a drum type due to the disk brakes ability
to dissipate heat more quickly. The friction material for the annular brake is in the
shape of an annulus and is bonded to both sides of the rotor disk. The slotted annular
brake is nearly the same as the annular brake described above, the only exception
being the presence of slots cut through the friction material on both sides of the rotor.
The purpose of the slots is to decrease surface temperature and wear rate during
braking. The pad brake configuration employs pads of friction material on the brake
stators. Multiplying factors for the specific type of brake design are as follows, based on
field performance data (Reference 20):

                 CBT = 1.25 for drum type brakes

                 CBT = 1.25 for slotted annular disk type brakes

                 CBT = 1.00 for pad disk type brakes

                 CBT = 0.90 for annulus disk type brakes

12.3.5.3 Dust Contaminant Multiplying Factor

     Operating conditions with high amounts of dust contaminants affects lining wear
depending on the binder resin used in formulating the friction material. The correction
factor for dust conditions is shown in Table 12-6.

                     Table 12-6. Dust Contamination Multiplying Factor
                                               (Reference 42)

                     Binder Resin         CRD

Phenolic                                  3.5

Oil-modified phenolic                     1.2

Rubber phenolic                           1.1

Cashew                                    1.1

Oil-phenolic                              1.1

Brakes and Clutches                12-12       Revision C
12.3.5.4 Temperature Multiplying Factor

     Wear of the friction material will be influenced by the ambient temperature in which
the vehicle is operating. The correction factor for temperature is (Reference 3):

         CT = 1.42 - 0.00154 X + 0.00000138 X 2                      (12-7)
                                                                     (12-8)
                    (for sintered metallic truck linings)            (12-9)
                                                                    (12-10)
         CT = 2.79 - 0.0109X + 0.0000124X 2
Where:
                    (for resin-asbestos linings used in automotive
                     and moderate duty industrial brakes)

         CT = 3.80 - 0.00759 X + 0.00000507 X 2

                    (for carbon-carbon linings)

          CT = 17.59 - 0.0603X + 0.0000534X 2

                    (for resin-asbestos truck linings)

        X = 590 + T
        T = Ambient temperature, oF

12.4 CLUTCHES

12.4.1 Clutch Assemblies

     The reliability of a clutch system is generally very high and is the result of the low
failure rate of its parts, which may include actuators, bearings, clutch friction linings,
seals and springs. With the exception of clutch friction linings, these component parts
are addressed in other chapters of this handbook. The general characteristics of friction
materials are addressed in Section 12.2. Those characteristics of friction materials
peculiar to clutches will be discussed in the following paragraphs.

     The principal function of a friction clutch is to convert kinetic energy to heat and then
either to absorb or otherwise dissipate the heat while simultaneously, through friction,
reducing the relative movement between the friction material and the part to which it is
engaged. In order to achieve these objectives the necessary energy conversion must
be accomplished with a minimum of wear on the contacting parts.

Brakes and Clutches  12-13  Revision C
12.4.2 Clutch Varieties

     Clutches are made up of two basic components, pressure plate and disc. The
pressure plate supplies sufficient force or pressure to the disc so enough friction is
developed to transmit the required torque.

     Friction clutches, although available in many different forms tend to be of the axial
or rim type. Axial clutches operate where the movement is parallel to the axis of the
shaft. Rim types operate where the movement is radial. Examples of the former are
the plate and cone clutches. Examples of the latter include coil or wrap spring and
chain clutches.

     Plate clutches are divided into two designs, single and multiplate. The single plate
design is used for transmission in light to medium power applications. The single plate
is normally provided with a friction lining on each side of the disc. Multiplate designs
employ a number of discs lined on both sides which serve to distribute the load over a
large area. These types are used for high torque and high load applications. They
require only moderate clamping pressures, and are suitable for high speed operation
because their relatively small size generates lower centrifugal forces.

     Cone clutches are used for smaller, medium power, low speed transmission
systems which may be subjected to rough usage. These devices cope well with such
treatment because of their simple robust construction, and due to the fact that heat is
dissipated more readily than with plate clutches.

     Rim and block clutches employ various means of engaging the stationary half of the
assembly through radial movement against the rim of the driving member. The action is
similar to that of an internally expanding brake shoe.

     Centrifugal clutches are often used with squirrel cage motors. The fabric facing
may be fitted to shoes or blocks mounted to a spider which is keyed onto the driving
shaft. The shoes or blocks are thrown outward by centrifugal force, engagement being
automatic when a predetermined speed has been reached.

     Coil or wrap spring clutches operate on the principle of a spring mounted on a drum
being tightened. The action is much like that of a rope tightening around a revolving
capstan. The design is compact, simple in construction and is used where high torques
are required from low power.

     Chain clutches employ inner and outer friction rings in an oil filled housing actuated
by cams bearing on chain toggles which force the rings together.

     Sprag clutches consist of a number of specially shaped steel springs or wedges
which jam inner and outer races in one direction only. This action leads to their use for
applications in over-running (where the clutch acts as a free-wheel) and back-

Brakes and Clutches      12-14  Revision C
stopping. This design is particularly useful for intermittent rotary motion involving, for
example, indexing or inching (Reference 34).

     Materials classification divides the friction materials into organic and metallic
groups. The organic group includes all materials composed of both asbestos and non-
asbestos fibers and bound by some resin binder. The metallic group consists of all
friction materials containing iron, copper, ceramic bronze, graphite, carbon or other
metallic material as the base material.

12.4.3 Clutch Assembly Failure Modes

     Failure modes of a clutch assembly are very similar to those of a brake assembly.
Hydraulic clutch failures are almost without exception due to a lack of fluid pressure.
Since a hydraulic clutch system uses pressure to engage and disengage components,
any loss of system pressure will result in unintended operation. These fluid leaks can be
external, but are more often internal leakages caused by seal failure. A list of failure
modes for a typical clutch assembly is shown in Table 12-7.

12.4.4 Clutch Failure Rate Model
     A typical clutch assembly will contain the following component parts:

· Actuators
· Bearings
· Clutch friction linings
· Seals
· Springs

     The total clutch system failure rate is the sum of the failure rates of each of the
above component parts in the system:

        CL = AC + BE + CF + SE + SP                                         (12-11)

Where:  CL = Total failure rate for the clutch system, failures/million hours

        AC = Total failure rate for actuators, failures/million hours

                  (See Chapter 9)

        BE = Total failure rate for bearings, failures/million hours

                 (See Chapter 7)

        CF = Total failure rate for clutch friction materials, failures/million hours

                  (See Section 12.4.5)

Brakes and Clutches        12-15     Revision C
                 SE = Total failure rate for seals, failures/million hours (See Chapter 3)

                 SP = Total failure rate for springs, failures/million hours

                             (See Chapter 4)

     The failure rates obtained from other chapters of the Handbook may have to be
converted from failures/million cycles to failures/million hours by multiplying by the
number of cycles per hour. The failure rate model for clutch friction materials is
presented in Section 12.4.5.

                     Table 12-7. Clutch Friction Surface Failure Modes
                                              (Reference 32)

PROBLEM              CHARACTERISTICS                    CAUSES

Dishing              Clutch plates distorted into a     Lack of conformability. The temp.
                     conical shape                      of the outer region of the plate is
                                                        higher than the inner region.

Waviness or Buckling Clutch plates become buckled       Lack of conformability. The inner
                              into a wavy platter       area is hotter than the outer area.

Banding or Crushing Loss of friction material at the    Crushing and excessive wear of the
                              ends of a band            friction material

Material Transfer    Friction material adhering to      Overheating and unsuitable friction
                     opposing plate, often giving rise  material
                     to excessive wear

Bond Failure         Material parting at the bond to    Poor bonding or overheating, the
                     the core plate causing loss of     high temperature affecting bonding
                     performance                        agent

Burst Failure        Material splitting and removed     High stresses on a facing when
                     from the spinner plate             working at high speeds

Grooving             Grooving of the facing material Material transfer to opposing plate
                     on the line of movement

Reduced Performance Decrease in coefficient of friction Excess oil or grease on friction

                     giving a permanent loss in         material or on the opposing surface

                     performance

Distortion           Facings out of flatness after high Unsuitable friction material
                     operating temperature

Brakes and Clutches               12-16                 Revision C
12.4.5 Clutch Friction Material Reliability Model

     By using the clutch system beyond the life of the friction material a drastic reduction
of friction coefficient can occur. This rapid deterioration can result in a catastrophic
failure of the clutch.

     Under normal operating conditions, the friction materials used in clutches are
reliable mechanical components. Like brake friction materials, the wear of clutch
materials is dependent on the amount of accumulated energy dissipated by the
mechanical component.

                     h = ko p s                                (12-12)

Where:  h = Change in thickness of the clutch friction material caused
               by wear, in

        ko = Wear coefficient, (lb/in2) -1 See Table 12-8

        p = Nominal pressure between the clutch wear plates, lbf/in2 = P/A

        P = Applied load, lbf
        A = Wear plate area, in2

        s = Sliding distance during clutch actuation, in = vs i ta

        vs = Sliding velocity, in/sec

        ta = Cutch actuation time, sec

    If the effective thickness of the clutch lining is d (inches), life of the clutch friction

material is given by the following equation:

                     Life = d                                  (12-13)
                             Wp

Where:  Life = Number of applications before friction material is completely
               worn

         d = Lining thickness, in

        Wp = Friction material wear per application, in

Brakes and Clutches              12-17             Revision C
                           Wp  = ko P vs ta                              (12-14)
                                      A

where:

                           A = Clutch lining area, in2

and:

        FR,B =        1    = Wp   = ko P vs ta                           (12-15)
                     Life      d        dA

     By normalizing Equation (12-15) to those values for which historical failure rate data
is available, the following failure rate model can be derived:

                               CF = CF ,B i CNP i CT                     (12-16)

Where: CF = Failure rate of the clutch friction material in failures/million hours

         CF,B = Base failure rate of the clutch friction material, failures/million

                         hours (See Section 12.4.5.1)

            CNP = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of multiple plates on

                         on the base failure rate (See Section 12.4.5.2)

             CT = Multiplying factor which considers the effect of ambient

                         temperature on the base failure rate (See Section 12.4.5.3)

12.4.5.1 Base Failure Rate for Clutch Lining / Disk Material

   The clutch friction material base failure rate, FR,B,B may be provided by the

manufacturer of the clutch assembly. If not, then the base rate can be calculated from
Equation (12-13).

12.4.5.2 Clutch Plate Quantity Multiplying Factor

     As noted previously, clutches can be divided into two design groups: single and
multiple plate. Multiplate designs use a number of discs which distribute the load, and
will therefore increase the reliability of the system.

The correction factor for the number of plates is given by:

Brakes and Clutches               12-18                      Revision C
CNP = Number of disks in the clutch

12.4.5.3 Temperature Multiplying Factor

     Because the temperature of the friction material affects the wear of the material, the
ambient temperature to which the clutch is exposed will affect the wear of the friction
lining (Reference 3). As a result:

CT = 1.42 - 0.00154X + 0.00000138X 2                                 (12-17)
                                                                     (12-18)
         (for sintered metallic linings)                             (12-19)
                                                                     (12-20)
CT = 2.79 - 0.0109X + 0.0000124 X 2

         (for resin-asbestos linings used in automotive
         and moderate duty industrial brakes)

CT = 3.80 - 0.00758X + 0.00000507 X 2

         (for carbon-carbon linings)

CT = 17.59 - 0.0603X + 0.0000534X 2

         (for resin-asbestos truck linings)

Where: X = 590 + T
           T = Ambient temperature, oF

Brakes and Clutches  12-19                               Revision C
Table 12-8. Typical Wear Coefficients for Brake and Clutch Linings
                              (Against cast iron or steel)

       Lining (pad) Material  Wear Coefficient, ko (psi-1)
Asbestos-type I Composite
Asbestos-type II Composite        6.46 x 10-11
Carbon-Carbon Composite           8.09 x 10-11
Sintered bronze (dry)             2..24 x 10-11
Non-asbestos composite (dry)      2.42 x 10-10
Sintered bronze (wet)             9.90 x 10-10
Sintered bronze composite         5.02 x 10-13
Sintered resin composite          9.31 x 10-11
                                  3.03 x 10-11

12.5 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 12, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of
brakes and clutches.

1. Abadzheva, R.N. et al., "Effects of Brake Fluid Components on Rubber", Khimiya i
   Tekhnologiya Topliv i Masel, No. 8, pp. 18-19 (Aug 1982).

3. Anderson, A.E., "Wear of Brake Materials", in: Wear Control Handbook, M.B.
    Peterson and W.O. Winer, Eds., pp. 843-857, Am. Soc. Mech. Eng., New York
    (1980).

9. Boone, Tony D., "Reliability Prediction Analysis for Mechanical Brake Systems",
   NAVAIR-SYSCOM Report (Aug 1981).

12. Carson, Harold, Springs: Troubleshooting and Failure Analysis, Marcel Dekker,
     Inc., New York. (1983).

16. Ferodo Limited, Friction Materials for Engineers, Stockport, England (1969).

Brakes and Clutches  12-20    Revision C
20. Ho, T.L., F.E. Kennedy and M.B. Peterson, "Evaluation of Materials and Design
     Modifications for Aircraft Brakes", NASA Report CR134896 (Jan 1975).

29. Minegishi, H. et al., "Prediction of Brake Pad Wear/Life by Means of Brake Severity
     Factor as Measured on a Data Logging System", SAE Paper 840358 (1984).

32. Neale, M.J., Tribology Handbook, Butterworths, London.

36. Orthwein, William C., Clutches and Brakes: Design and Selection, Marcel Dekker,
     Inc., New York (1986).

37. Rhee, S.K. and P.A. Thesier, "Effects of Surface Roughness of Brake Drums on
     Coefficient of Friction and Lining Wear", SAE Paper 720449 (1972).

40. Spokas, R.B., "Clutch Friction Material Evaluation Procedures", SAE Paper 841066
     (1984).

58. Parmley, R.O., Mechanical Components Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY,
      1985.

77. Randall F. Barron and Herbert G. Tull, III, "Failure Rate Model for Aircraft Brakes
     and Clutches", Report No. DTRC-CMLD-CR-01-90, August 1990, Louisiana Tech
     University

78. Randall F. Barron and Herbert G. Tull, III, "Failure Rate Model for Aircraft Brakes
     and Clutches", Report No. NSWC-92/LO2, August 1992, Louisiana Tech University

Brakes and Clutches  12-21  Revision C
                     This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Brakes and Clutches  12-22                               Revision C
                         13 CHAPTER

                         COMPRESSORS

13.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     13.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
     13.2 POSITIVE DISPLACEMENT COMPRESSORS .............................................. 2

        13.2.1 Rotary Compressors ................................................................................. 3
        13.2.2 Reciprocating Compressors ...................................................................... 4
     13.3 CENTRIFUGAL COMPRESSORS .................................................................. 5
     13.4 COMPRESSOR FAILURE MODES................................................................. 6
     13.5 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR COMPRESSOR ASSEMBLY........................ 10
     13.6 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR CASING ........................................................ 11
     13.7 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR DESIGN CONFIGURATION ......................... 11
        13.7.1 Compressor Service Load Multiplying Factors ........................................ 13
     13.8 DIAPHRAGM FAILURE RATE MODEL......................................................... 13
        13.8.1 Axial Load Multiplying Factor................................................................... 14
        13.8.2 Atmospheric Contaminant Multiplying Factor .......................................... 18
        13.8.3 Liquid Contaminant Multiplying Factor .................................................... 18
        13.8.4 Temperature Multiplying Factor............................................................... 19
     13.9 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 25

13.1 INTRODUCTION

     A compressor is a machine for compressing gas from an initial intake pressure to a
higher exhaust pressure through a reduction in volume. A compressor consists of a
driving unit, the compression unit and accessory equipment. The driving unit provides
power to operate the compressor and may be an electric motor or a gasoline or diesel
engine. Types of gases compressed include air for compressed tool and instrument air
systems; hydrogen, oxygen, etc. for chemical processing and various gases for storage
or transmission. A compressed air system consists of one or more compressors, each
with the necessary power source, air regulator, intake air filter, aftercooler, air receiver,
and connecting piping, together with a distribution system to carry the air to points of
use.

     Compressors can be classified, in their broadest sense, in two categories: (1)
positive displacement and (2) centrifugal. The positive-displacement classification can
generally be described as a "volume reducing" type. In essence, an increase in gas
pressure can be achieved by simultaneously reducing the volume enclosing the gas. In

Compressors        13-1  Revision B
all positive displacement compressors, a measured volume of inlet gas is confined in a
given space and then compressed by reducing this confined volume. Next, the gas at
this now elevated pressure is discharged into the system piping.

     The centrifugal classification refers to the type of velocity increase for centrifugal
action. In a centrifugal compressor the gas is forced through the impeller by rapidly
rotating impeller blades. The kinetic velocity energy from the rotating impeller is
converted to pressure energy, partially in the impeller and partially in the stationary
diffuser. The stationary diffuser converts the velocity head into pressure.

     Each type of compressor is designed for specific applications and requirements. A
reliability analysis therefore requires an investigation of the design features for the
particular compressor. It is important to know what is inside the compressor not only to
know the failure rate, but also how to logistically support the compressor in terms of
spare parts and maintenance philosophy. The following section provides a basic
description of the different types of compressors.

13.2 POSITIVE DISPLACEMENT COMPRESSORS

     Positive displacement compressors include a wide spectrum of design
configurations. As shown in Figure 13.1, positive displacement machines can be further
defined by two sub classifications: rotary and reciprocating.

             Figure 13.1 Common Classifications for Compressors

Compressors  13-2  Revision B
13.2.1 Rotary Compressors

     Rotary positive displacement compressors incorporate a rotating element to
displace a fixed volume of gas during each machine revolution. The following
paragraphs provide a brief description of the different types of rotary compressors.

     Rotary Screw - A common rotary compressor is the rotary screw. Rotary screw
compressors produce compressed gas by filling the void between two helical mated
screws and their housing. As the two helical screws are turned, the volume of gas is
reduced resulting in an increase of gas pressure. Cooling and lubrication are obtained
by injecting oil into the bearing and compression area. After the compression cycle, the
oil and gas are separated before the gas is exhausted from the compressor.

     Lobe - The rotary lobe compressor is typically constructed with two or three figure
eight-shaped rotors, meshed together, and driven through timing gears attached to each
shaft. It is a relatively low pressure machine (normally 5 to 7 psig and up to 25 psig for
special types) and is well suited for applications with vacuum pressures. A lobe
compressor provides a large throughput capability with little or no flow pulsation.

     Sliding Vane - The sliding vane rotary compressor has a rotor construction which is
offset, containing slots for vanes to slide in and out during each revolution. As the rotor
turns during a single revolution, compression is achieved as the volume goes from a
maximum at the intake ports to a minimum at the exhaust port. The vanes are forced
outward from within the rotor slots and held against the stator wall by rotational
acceleration. Oil is injected into the gas intake and along the stator walls to cool the
gas, lubricate the bearings and vanes, and provide a seal between the vanes and the
stator wall. After the compression cycle, the oil and gas are separated prior to the gas
being transferred from the compressor.

     Liquid Ring ­ In a liquid ring compressor the rotor is positioned centrally in an oval-
shaped casing. During rotation, which happens without metal-to-metal contact, a ring of
liquid is formed which moves with the rotor and follows the shape of the casing. During
rotation, the liquid completely fills the chambers of the rotor and as the rotation
continues, the liquid follows the contour of the casing and recedes again, leaving
spaces to be filled by the incoming gas. As a result of the suction action thus created,
gas is pulled into the compressor. As the rotation progresses, the liquid is forced back
into the chambers, compressing the gas. This gas is forced out of the discharge port
through an outlet flange. The compressor is fed continuously with liquid which maintains
a seal between the inlet and discharge ports and at the same time removes the heat of
compression. This liquid leaves the compressor together with the compressed gas and
is separated from the gas in a discharge separator.

Compressors  13-3  Revision B
13.2.2 Reciprocating Compressors

     Reciprocating air compressors are positive displacement machines in that they
increase the pressure of the air by reducing its volume. As shown in Figure 13.1, there
are various reciprocating compressor designs, the most common being the piston.

     Piston - In this design, successive volumes of air are taken into the compressor
and a piston within a cylinder compresses the air to a higher pressure. Air is released
by mechanical valves that typically operate automatically by differential pressures. Inlet
valves open when the pressure in the cylinder is slightly below the intake pressure.
Discharge valves open when the pressure in the cylinder is slightly above the discharge
pressure. Depending on the system design, cylinders may have one or multiple suction
and discharge valves. Single stage compressors are commonly available for pressures
in the range of 70 psi to 100 psi and two stage compressors are generally used for
higher pressures in the range of 100 psi to 250 psi. A reciprocating air compressor is
single acting when the compression is accomplished using one side of the piston and
double acting if compression is accomplished using both sides of the piston during the
advancing and retreating stroke.

     Compression to high pressures in a reciprocating compressor may result in a
temperature rise too great to permit the compression to be carried to completion in one
cylinder, even though it is cooled. In such cases, the compression is carried out in
stages, with a partial increase of pressure in each stage, and cooling of the gas
between stages. Two and three-stage compression is common where pressures of
300-1000 psi are needed. In determining the number of stages (pistons) within a
reciprocating compressor, the change in temperature across a stage, loading of the
piston rod, and change in pressure across a stage are among the parameters taken into
consideration.

     Labyrinth - The labyrinth compressor is a vertical type reciprocating machine. In
this type of compressor, rider rings and piston rings are not used as in the case of a
horizontal type design. In labyrinth piston compressors, an extremely large number of
throttling points provide the sealing effect around pistons and piston rods. No contact
seals are used. The piston contains a labyrinth type piece at the center called a skirt.
The cylinder also contains serration-like labyrinths on its inside surface. The piston is
not in direct contact with the cylinder and close clearance is maintained between the
piston and cylinder.

    Labyrinth compressors are used where total dry operation is required and where
lubricants are not allowed in the cylinders such as an oxygen compressor where safety
is extremely important. Labyrinth compressors are also employed in applications where
the process gas is heavily contaminated with impurities.

Compressors  13-4  Revision B
    Diaphragm - The diaphragm compressor is a unique design employing a flexible
diaphragm to compress the gas. The back and forth moving membrane is driven by a
rod and a crankshaft mechanism. Only the membrane and the compressor box come in
contact with the pumped gas and thus the diaphragm compressor is often used for
pumping explosive and toxic gases. The membrane has to be reliable enough to take
the strain of pumped gas. It must also have adequate chemical properties and sufficient
temperature resistance.

     Piston and diaphragm compressors possess many of the same components:
crankcase, crankshaft, piston, and connecting rods. The primary difference between
the two compressor designs lies in how the gas is compressed. In a piston compressor,
the piston is the primary gas displacing element. However, in diaphragm compressors
compression is achieved by the flexing of a thin metal, rubber or fabricated disk which is
caused by the hydraulic system and operated by the motion of a reciprocating piston in
a cylinder under the diaphragm. The diaphragm completely isolates the gas from the
piston during the compression cycle. A hydraulic fluid transmits the motion of the piston
to the diaphragm.

     Diaphragms, in general, are round flexible plates which undergo an elastic
deflection when subjected to an axial loading. In the application of compressors, this
axial loading and elastic deflection creates a reduction in volume of the space adjacent
to the diaphragm. The gas is compressed and a pressure builds. The diaphragm can
be designed in many different ways with variations in such parameters as materials,
size and shape.

13.3 CENTRIFUGAL COMPRESSORS

     Centrifugal compressors depend on the transfer of energy from a rotating impeller
to a gas discharge. The centrifugal force utilized by a centrifugal compressor is similar
to a centrifugal pump. As gas enters the eye of the impeller the rotating impeller
presses the gas against the compressor casing. The high speed spinning impellers
accelerate the gas as additional gas is pressed against the casing by the impeller
blades. A liquid ring (or piston) rotary is constructed of circular vanes, turning inside a
casing sealed with a liquid. Centrifugal forces cause the liquid to form a ring around the
periphery of the casing interior, while forcing the gas inward toward the center of the
vaned rotor. The gradual decrease in volume increases the pressure of the gas. Any
liquid entrained in the gas is separated out. This type of compressor is characteristically
used in low pressure and vacuum applications. Centrifugal compressors are normally
designed for higher capacity than positive displacement machines because flow through
the compressor is continuous. Typical applications include aircraft engines.

     Centrifugal compressors can be divided into two subcategories based on the
direction of flow of the product gas: radial flow and axial flow machines. The
characteristic curves of these machines offer a wide range in flow with a corresponding

Compressors                   13-5  Revision B
small change in head pressure. The centrifugal compressor is a continuous duty
compressor with few moving parts making it well suited to high volume applications.
The lack of rubbing parts in the compressed gas stream is a particularly desirable
feature of these machines from a reliability standpoint.

     Radial Flow - In radial compressors, velocity is imparted to a gas stream through
centrifugal forces acting in a radial direction to the shaft. The simplest style of radial
centrifugal compressor is the single-stage overhung design. The conventional closed or
shrouded impeller is used for adiabatic heads to about 12,000 ft-lb/lb. The open, radial-
bladed impeller develops more head for the same diameter and speed.

     Axial Flow - In axial flow machines, the gas flow remains parallel to the shaft,
without a direction change. These machines are typically used for higher capacities
than radial flow machines, but generate much lower head pressure per stage. As a
result, these machines are usually built with many stages. The characteristic
performance curve is steeper than that of radial flow machines, with a more narrow
stability range.

     In summary, the different types and designs of compressors will result in different
failure modes and failure rates. The next section provides some failure modes, causes
and effects that need to be considered prior to estimating the total failure rate of the
compressor in its operating environment.

13.4 COMPRESSOR FAILURE MODES

     Figure 13.1 shows the various types of available compressor designs. Within these
nomenclatures there are specific compressor designs with there own failure modes. To
obtain an accurate list of failure modes for an individual compressor, a detailed parts list
is needed and a thorough analysis of the interaction of component parts is required.
For example, several stages of compressor units may be included in the overall
compressor system which will require the determination of the effects of failure of
adjacent stages if there is a failure of one particular stage.

     Failure modes for compressors and certain compressor parts are listed in Table 13-
1. Some failure modes are more prevalent than others as a direct result of the variety of
compressor types and differing environmental conditions of operation.

Compressors  13-6  Revision B
                          Table 13-1. Compressor Failure Modes
                                      (References 2 and 86)

FAILURE MODE                FAILURE CAUSE                     FAILURE EFFECT

                                General compressor failure modes
                    ( see specific compressor type failure modes below)

Seal failure                See Chapter 3                     - Reduced output

Bearing failure             See Chapter 7                     - Low flow pulsation

Gear failure                See Chapter 8                     - Compressor noise,
Belt failure                See Chapter 21                    vibration and complete
Shaft failure               See Chapter 20                    failure

Clogged filter assembly     - Contaminants                    - Corrosion, excessive
                            - See Chapter 11 for additional   temperature causing
                                                              winding damage
                             failure causes

Temperature sensor failure See Chapter 19                     - Loss of overload
                                                              protection

Loss of motor power source  - Compressor overload             - Loss of compressor
                                                              output
                            - Misalignment between motor
                             and compressor                   - Contaminants from
                                                              burnt motor windings
                            - See Chapter 14 for additional
                             failure causes

Corrosion, water hammer,    - Moisture within the compressor  - Acid gases mixed with
freeze damage               - Discharge temperature <55 C     internal moisture
                                                              accelerates the corrosion
Internal corrosion           higher than inlet air            process

                            - Faulty filtration
                            - Acid gases from the

                             environment

Clogged suction strainer    - Mechanical wear                 - Loss of gas capacity
Pressure pulsations
                            - Erosion of close-clearance
                             moving parts

Loss of gas output          - Fractured compressor casing     - Compressor failure
                            - Seal leakage
                            - Connection failure
                            - See individual compressor

                              types below

Improper lubrication of     - Seal leakage                    - Reduced compressor
mechanical parts                                                efficiency

                                                              - Eventual loss of output

Compressors                 13-7                                         Revision B
                           Table 13-1. Compressor Failure Modes
                                              (Continued)

      FAILURE MODE                  FAILURE CAUSE                FAILURE EFFECT

Increased friction and wear  - Contaminants                   - Decreased
                             - Poor lubrication                performance,
                             - Excessive heat from running
                                                              - Increased vibration
                              compressor outside limits

Enclosure damage caused      - High fluctuating stresses      - Material fatigue
by vibration                 - Insufficient foundation

The following failure modes apply to reciprocating compressors and need to be
      considered in addition to the general compressor failure modes above

Cylinder fails to move       - Spring loaded valve fails to   - Loss of gas output
Cylinder leakage              open
                                                              - Reduced compressor
                             - Mechanical wear                 efficiency
                             - Damaged seal

Liquid entering one or more  - Seal failure                   - Permanent valve damage
compression cylinders                                         - Compressor failure

Damaged piston rings         - Low compressor oil             - Maintenance required
                             - Wear

Inoperative suction on       - Valve leakage                  - Reduced compressor
discharge valve              - Discharge valve fails to open    efficiency

Damaged cylinder packing     - Moisture entering cylinder     - Permanent valve damage
ring
                                                              - Reduced compressor
                                                               efficiency

Damaged piston ­ crankshaft - Mechanical binding              - Noisy compressor

connecting rod               - Loss of lubricant              - Reduced compressor
                                                                efficiency

Unbalanced crankshaft        - See Chapter 20                 - Noisy compressor

                                                              - Reduced compressor
                                                                efficiency

Mechanical overloading of    - Low compressor oil             - Compressor failure
piston                       - Wear
                             - Excessive duty cycle

Compressors                  13-8                                Revision B
                            Table 13-1. Compressor Failure Modes
                                               (Continued)

FAILURE MODE                        FAILURE CAUSE              FAILURE EFFECT

The following failure modes apply to rotary compressors and need to be
 considered in addition to the general compressor failure modes above

Variable clearance between     - Bent shaft, shock, vibration  - Severe rotor wear
helical rotors                                                 - Compressor failure

Contaminants between helical   - Compressor operated in        - Severe rotor wear
rotors                          contaminated environment       - Compressor failure

                               - Acid in ambient air

Loss of lube film between      - Loss of lubricant             - Loss of gas capacity
helical rotors                 - Worn rotors

Loss of coolant capability     - Loss of injected lubricant    - Damaged rotors
                                                               - Compressor failure

Clogged discharge port         - Clogged filter                - Loss of compressor air
                               - Contaminants through rotor     output

                                section

Oil and gas not sufficiently   - Filter damage                 - Contaminated gas output
separated in high pressure     - Plugged filter
area

Leakage of output gas back to  - Mechanical wear               - Loss of gas capacity
low pressure side (slippage)

Reduction of internal          - Distortion of rotor due to    - Rubbing, increased wear
clearances                      cyclic loading;

Accumulation of water in the   - Cooler failure                - Early compressor failure
lubricant

Valve sticking                 - Over lubrication, moisture in - Overheating, increased

                               oil                             wear

The following failure modes apply to diaphragm compressors and need to be
    considered in addition to the general compressor failure modes above

Accelerated curing,            - Extreme high or low           - Decreased performance
embrittlement of diaphragm      temperature

Corrosion or cracking of       - Contaminants                  - Decreased performance
diaphragm

Valve sticking                 - Over lubrication, moisture in - Overheating, increased

                               oil                             wear

Compressors                         13-9                             Revision B
                            Table 13-1. Compressor Failure Modes
                                               (Continued)

        FAILURE MODE              FAILURE CAUSE                    FAILURE EFFECT

Diaphragm rupture or crack  - Inadequate strength              - Loss of air output
                              characteristics

                            - Insufficient material pasticity
                            - Corrosion
                            - Local stresses at seating

                             surface
                            - Material hardening

13.5 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR COMPRESSOR ASSEMBLY

     A compressor system is made up of one or more stages. For example, a single-
stage compressor is comprised of a single element or group of elements in parallel.
However, two and three-stage compression may be required where higher pressures
are needed. The total compressor may therefore be comprised of elements or groups
of elements in series to form a multistage compressor based on the change in
temperature and pressure across each stage.

     Every compressor to be analyzed for reliability will be a unique design and
comprised of many different components. The following example equation will need to
be modified for the particular compressor design.

             C = (FD i CSF ) + CA + BE + VA + SE + SH                               (13-1)

Where:   C = Total failure rate of compressor, failures/million hours

        FD = Failure rate of fluid driver, failures/million hours (See

                   Section 13.7)

        CSF = Compressor Service Multiplying Factor (See Table 13-5)

        CA = Failure rate of the compressor casing, failures/million

                   hours (See Section 13.6)

        BE = Total failure rate of compressor shaft bearings, failures/million

                  hours (See Chapter 7)

Compressors                 13-10                                       Revision B
             VA = Total failure rate of control valve assemblies, failures/million

                          hours (See Chapter 6)

             SE = Total failure rate of compressor seals, failures/million hours

                          (See Chapter 3)

             SE = Failure rate of compressor shaft, failures/million hours

                          (See Chapter 20)

     Additional parameters in the equation that may be necessary include timing gears
(Chapter 8), belt (Chapter 21), couplings (Chapter 17), sensors (Chapter 19), filter
(Chapter 11) and clutch (Chapter 12).

     Different compressor configurations such as piston, rotary screw and centrifugal
have different parts within the total compressor and it is important to obtain a parts list
for the compressor prior to estimating its reliability. For example, a reciprocating piston
compressor will contain suction and discharge valves while a rotary screw compressor
will not normally contain control valves but may contain some unique oil/gas separator
filters. The fluid driver of the compressor may be only a small part of the total
compressor failure rate. The failure rate for each part comprising the compressor must

be determined before the entire compressor assembly failure rate, C, can be

determined. Section 13.7 provides some guidance as to the various compressor
configurations. Failure rates for each part will depend on expected operational and
environmental factors that exist during normal compressor operation. It is important to
consider each compressor stage in a multi-stage compressor as a separate compressor
with the total failure rate as the sum of the failure rates for the individual stages. For
example, a total compressor system may be comprised of a centrifugal compressor
followed by an oil-free reciprocating compressor. The total system failure rate is the
sum of the failure rates for the two units.

13.6 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR CASING

     The compressor casing, normally a very reliable component, can have a large effect
on the life of other components in the compressor assembly (especially seals and
bearings). Casing construction design, connections, casing material and production
testing are specified to meet the application, safety and casing-pressure requirements.
The value of reliability of compressor casings, through the experience of many different

manufacturers, can generally be equated to a CA value of 0.010 failures/million hours.

13.7 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR DESIGN CONFIGURATION

     Various reliabilities are inherent in specific designs and types of compressors. For
example, it is expected that the reliability due to wear will be different in a rotary screw
compressor compared to a centrifugal compressor due to the nature of metal-to-metal
contact and rotor speeds. The various chapters of this handbook can be used to

Compressors  13-11                                Revision B
estimate the failure rates of the individual component parts. The fluid driver parameter

FD can be approximated by data presented in Table 13-4 for various types of fluid

drivers, developed from information collected by such sources as OREDA and the
U.S. Navy.

     Typical component parts of a compressor that need to be evaluated for reliability
include the following:

    - drive unit
    - air end
    - cooling system
    - receiver tanks
    - air dryers
    - filters
    - piping distribution system

A rotary compressor is typically comprised of the following components:
    - air intake filter unit usually a two stage assembly required by rotary compressors
    - rotor unit comprised of screws, lobes or vanes to compress the gas and a
       discharge port. A non-lubricated rotary compressor will contain timing gears
       to drive the rotors
    - oil injection unit to supply lubrication between the rotating screws or vanes
       and prevent gas leakage
    - aftercooler unit
    - oil/gas separator unit to separate the oil from the gas
    - oil filter unit
    - oil cooler unit

A reciprocating compressor is typically comprised of the following components:
    - compressing unit consisting of air cylinders, single or double acting piston
       for each cylinder, air inlet valves and discharge valves
    - mechanical unit consisting of connecting rods, piston rods, crossheads,
       and a crankshaft and flywheel
    - lubricating unit for bearings, gears, and cylinder walls consisting of a
       pump or force-fed lubricator to supply oil to the compressor cylinders
    - regulation unit to maintain the pressure in the discharge line and gas
       storage tank at the required pressure

A centrifugal compressor is typically comprised of the following components:
    - Rotating components mounted on a shaft that drives a central drum retained
       by bearings

Compressors  13-12  Revision B
13.7.1 Compressor Service Load Multiplying Factors

     As mentioned previously in this Chapter, each type of compressor is uniquely
designed for a particular application and requirement. Some designs are more sensitive
to a particular operating environment and require particular attention as part of the
reliability estimate. For example, inlet air condition is an important consideration in
estimating compressor reliability. A proper inlet filtration prevents erosion of seals and
close clearance moving parts. Some compressor designs are more sensitive than
others to the entrance of contaminants into the compressor. Another factor is high
ambient humidity that if not controlled can cause corrosion. Duty cycle, ambient
operating temperature, lubrication quality, shock and vibration are all operating and
environmental parameters that need to be considered with respect to the sensitivity of
the design to that parameter. Table 13-5 provides multiplying factors that modify the
base failure rate considering each potential operating or environmental condition.

13.8 DIAPHRAGM FAILURE RATE MODEL

     The diaphragm compressor is a unique design employing a flexible diaphragm to
establish compression of gas. The back and forth moving membrane is driven by a rod
and a crankshaft mechanism as shown in Figure 13.3. Only the membrane and the
compressor box come in contact with the pumped gas and thus the diaphragm
compressor is often used for pumping explosive and toxic gases. Because of the unique
design properties and applications of the diaphragm compressor this section is included
to provide a more detailed analysis of the diaphragm itself. Table 13-4 can be used in
lieu of this detailed procedure.

FD in Equation (13-1) for the diaphragm compressor can be written as:

Where:                           FD = DI
             DI = Total failure rate of the diaphragm assembly

And:

             DI = BFD i CP i CAC i CLC i CT                                 (13-2)

Where:

             BFD = Compressor diaphragm base failure rate, 0.58 failures/million

                       hrs.

               CP = Factor for effects of axial loading (See Section 13.8.1)

             CAC = Factor for effects of atmospheric contaminants (See

                      Section 13.8.2)

Compressors  13-13                                              Revision B
                 CLC = Factor for effects of liquid contaminants (See Section 13.8.3)

                  CT = Factor for effects of temperature (See Section 13.8.4)

13.8.1 Axial Load Multiplying Factor

     Diaphragms, in general, are round flexible plates which undergo an elastic
deflection when subjected to an axial loading. In the application of compressors, this
axial loading and elastic deflection creates a reduction in volume of the space adjacent
to the diaphragm. The gas is compressed and a pressure builds. The diaphragm can
be designed in many different ways with variations in such parameters as materials,
size and shape. The model developed for a compressor diaphragm is shown in Figure
13.2. It has a passive area in the center which is rigid. This area transmits a force from
the push rod to the diaphragm. To be effective, the thickness of the rigid center should
be at least 6 times the thickness of the diaphragm.

             Figure 13.2 Compressor Diaphragm Model

     The characteristic equations describing the compressor diaphragm are given in
Equations (13-3) through (13-9) and are based on the following restrictive assumptions:

(1) Diaphragm is flat and of uniform thickness.
(2) Diaphragm material is isotropic and homogeneous.
(3) All forces, loads, and reactions are applied normally to the plane of the plate.
(4) Diaphragm thickness not greater than 20% of its diameter.

Compressors  13-14                                   Revision B
(5) The effects of shearing stresses and pressures on planes parallel to the
     surface of the diaphragm have not been taken into account. They are
     considered insignificant in diaphragms with thickness to radius ratios (h/a)
     of less than 0.15.

(6) The stresses created in a diaphragm due to bending and tensile loading
     may be combined by summing their values (method of superposition).

     The characteristic equation of a rigid center diaphragm loaded by a force for any
magnitude of deflection is given by Equation (13-3). It is applicable for (b/a) ratios
greater than 0.05.

                   F   =  E        h3  yo   +    h  yo3                                (13-3)
                          a2        K                     B
                                       F                     

Where: F = Force applied to rigid disk of diaphragm, lb

             E = Modulus of elasticity, lbs/in2

             a = Radius of diaphragm, in

             h = Diaphragm thickness, in

             yo = Vertical deflection at center of diaphragm, in

             KF = Modified Stiffness Coefficient based on diaphragm

                          ( ) 3 1- 2                  c2  -1   -  ln  c2               (13-4)
                                                      4   c2      c2  - 1
             bending loads, =                       

             B = Stiffness coefficient based on diaphragm tensile loading,
                   as follows:

                7  -   1+ b2     +    b4    +    (3 - )2 b2
                   3                  a4         (1+) a2
             =            a2                                                           (13-5)
                                      b4  
                   (1  -    )      -  a4         -  b2    2
                               1            1       a2    
                                                          

              = Poisson's ratio
              c = Ratio of radii (diaphragm-to-disk), a/b, in/in
             b = Radius of rigid center plate of diaphragm, in

Compressors                           13-15                                Revision B
     The maximum radial stress for a force-loaded diaphragm with rigid center occurs at

the inner perimeter of the diaphragm (b):

                   r  =  F KF BF                             (13-6)
                          2 h2

Where:       r = Maximum radial stress, lbs/in2

             BFB = Modified stiffness coefficient, based on diaphragm tensile loading

                ( ) 2 c2 2c2 ln c - c2 + 1                   (13-7)
             ( ) = 1 - 2 c2 - 1 2 - 4c2 ln2 c

     At equilibrium, where the force transmitted by the push rod in Figure 13.2 generates
a maximum pressure in the chamber above the diaphragm (i.e., the rod has completed
its stroke), a balance of forces in the vertical direction is established.

     If the increased performance of a compressor is to be evaluated and the change in
shaft power requirements are known, the following equation, in combination with
Equation (13-6), can be used to evaluate the maximum induced stress in the
diaphragm:

             r  =  396,000 hp KF  BF                         (13-8)

                      2 L h2

Where:       hp = Shaft output horsepower
              L = Offset of eccentric shaft, in

              = Output shaft speed, rpm

     The maximum stress is calculated from Equation (13-8) for the compressor rated
condition. Then the maximum stress for the actual operating condition is calculated in
the same manner.

     Empirical studies show that for moderate to high strains, a mechanical tearing of
rubber, referred to as "mechanical-oxidative cut growth", can be the mechanism of
failure for rubber diaphragms. The cut growth may greatly increase in the presence of
oxygen. For this mode of failure, the fatigue life is inversely proportional to a power of
the strain energy of the rubber. The strain energy is a characteristic of each type of

Compressors              13-16                   Revision B
rubber, and in turn, inversely proportional to the strain experienced by rubber under
cyclic stressing. Figure 13.3 shows the stress-strain relationship for natural rubber
compounds. Unlike many other engineering materials, rubber can be manufactured
with a wide range of elastic moduli. Stiffness variations can be attained with no
dimensional changes by varying the incorporation of fillers (reinforcing carbon blacks).
This "hardness" variable is essentially a measurement of reversible elastic penetration
(International Rubber Hardness Degrees or IRHD).

     The stress developed in a rubber diaphragm can be calculated from Equation (13-
6). Although rubber is flexible, (i.e., has low elastic and shear moduli), it is highly

incompressible in bulk and its Poisson's ratio,  can be approximated as 0.5. This will

facilitate the use of these equations. From the stress calculated, Figures 13.3 and 13.6

provide a corresponding load multiplying factor, CP.

     The value for strain obtained from Figure 13.3 must exceed 75%. Below this strain,

the mechanical-oxidative cut growth mode of failure does not apply, and the CP factor

becomes 1.0.

             Figure 13.3 Tensile Stress-Strain Curves for Four Natural
                  Rubber Compounds of Different Hardness (Ref 31)

Compressors  13-17  Revision B
13.8.2 Atmospheric Contaminant Multiplying Factor

     The very small concentration of ozone in the atmosphere, normally a few parts per
hundred million at ground level, may cause cracking in strained rubber components.
Under cyclic conditions of strain below about 75%, ozone cut growth is the major factor
in determining fatigue life.

     Experimental data presented in Figure 13.7 illustrates that fatigue life is proportional
to the concentration of ozone. The stress developed in a rubber diaphragm can be

calculated from Equation (13-6). Poisson's ratio, , can be equated to 0.5.

     Table 13-2 can be used to determine the strain by dividing the value of stress
obtained from Equation (13-6) by Young's modulus. Figure 13.7 and this strain value

are then used to determine the contaminant air performance multiplying factor, CAC.

13.8.2.1 Adjustment to Atmospheric Contaminant Multiplying Factor

     In ozone-dominant failure potentials, the use of chemical anti-ozonant (coating) on
the surface of the rubber diaphragm can reduce crack growth by a factor of 3. If a

coating is used, the multiplying factor, CAC, obtained from Figure 13.7 should be

multiplied by 1/3.

13.8.3 Liquid Contaminant Multiplying Factor

     Water absorption does not usually cause any significant deterioration of rubber, but
the absorption of oil and solvents cause rubber to swell with a consequent deterioration
in certain properties. Thin components can be expected to fail rapidly if the major
surfaces are exposed to oil. Thick components are effectively protected by their bulk.
Such components can last many years in an oily environment. Diffusion theory predicts
that the mass of liquid absorbed per unit area of rubber (in the early stages of swelling)
is proportional to the square root of the time taken for the absorption.

The rate of movement of the boundary between swollen and unswollen rubber is

calculated from:

                  PR = L                                           (13-9)
                          t

Where:            PR = Penetration rate, in/sec0.5
                   L = Depth of the swollen layer, in

Compressors       13-18                                Revision B
                    t = Time that a given mass of liquid is absorbed by a given

                               surface, sec

     The failure rate for a rubber diaphragm is dependent on the presence of liquid
contaminants and the viscosity of the liquid in contact with it. Typical penetration rates
are shown in Figure 13.4. Figure 13.4 reveals that the penetration rate into natural
rubber decreases as the viscosity of the swelling liquid increases.

     An adjustment for various types of diaphragm materials can be made using the
multiplying factors presented in Table 13-3. These factors should be multiplied by the
penetration rate obtained from Figure 13.4 prior to using the nomograph in Figure 13.5.

                                Table 13-2. Hardness and Elastic Moduli

             HARDNESS,  YOUNG'S MODULUS,
                 IRHD             E, lb/in2

                    30               130
                    35               168
                    40               213
                    45               256
                    50               310
                    55               460
                    60               630
                    65               830
                    70              1040
                    75              1340

13.8.4 Temperature Multiplying Factor

     The variations in ambient temperature commonly occurring in practice are unlikely
to greatly affect fatigue behavior. Experiments over a range of -32 to 212 F indicate only
a slight effect of temperature on the fatigue life of crystallizing natural rubber. In
general, rubbers become weaker as the temperature is raised. There is a steady fall in
strength up to a critical temperature at which an abrupt drop occurs. For natural rubber,
this temperature is about 212 F.

A temperature multiplying factor, CT, can be developed as follows:

Compressors             13-19                                       Revision B
For: -32F < T  212 F, CT = 1.0
  and for: T > 212 F, CT = 6.7

             Figure 13.4 Effect of Liquid Viscosity on the Penetration
                              Rate of Liquids into Natural Rubber

Compressors  13-20              Revision B
             Table 13-3. Contaminant Adjustment Factor
                     For Various Diaphragm Materials

                       RUBBER               X
             Natural                       1.0
             Cis polybutadiene             1.3
             Butyl                         0.7
             SBR                           0.7
             Neoprene WRT                  0.4
             Nitrile (38% acrylonitrile)   0.1
             Metal                        0.001

             Figure 13.5 Nomograph for the Determination of Liquid

                         Contaminant Multiplying Factor, CLC

Compressors  13-21                                      Revision B
                                       100.000

Axial Loading Multiplying Factor, C P  10.000

                                       1.000
                                               50 75 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700 750 800

                                                                                 Maximum Strain, %

                                       For S  75%: CP = 1.0

                                       For S > 75%:  CP  =   S    1.8
                                                              75  

                                       Where: S = Strain, %

                                       Figure 13.6 Axial Loading Multiplying Factor as a Function of Strain

Compressors                                                            13-22  Revision B
Atmospheric Contaminant Multiplying Factor, C AC100.0                  Ozone = 7.5 pphm
                                                 10.0
                                                                                                                             Ozone = 0.3 pphm
                                                                                                                             (laboratory atmosphere)

                                                1.0

                                                       10  20  30      40 Maxi5m0um Stra6i0n, % 70  80  90                                            100

                                                  For ozone 0.3 pphm:  CAC  =  S    1.1
                                                                                10  

                                                  For ozone 7.5 pphm:  CAC  =  S    2
                                                                                10  

                                                  Where S = Strain, %

                                                           Figure 13.7 Atmospheric Contaminant Multiplying Factor

Compressors                                                                         13-23               Revision B
             Table 13-4. Failure Rate for Fluid Drivers (FD)

                             (See note following table)

FLUID DRIVER MODE MODEL TYPE         BASE RATE*

Radial flow    ------                     FD

                                             12.0

Axial flow     ------                12.0

Reciprocating  Single piston         14.0
Reciprocating
Reciprocating  Double acting piston  16.5
Reciprocating
Reciprocating  Labyrinth             16.5
Rotary
Rotary         Rubber Diaphragm **   22.8
Rotary
Rotary         Metal Diaphragm       28.5

               Vane                  12.0

               Screw                 12.0

               Lobe                  12.0

               Liquid Ring           12.0

     * Failures/million hours of operation

     ** See Section 13.8 for specific failure rate calculations

     Note: If the complete compressor has multiple stages determine the failure rate for
each stage as an independent compressor and total the failure rates.

Compressors    13-24                                          Revision B
             Table 13-5 Compressor Service Load Multiplying Factors

        Multiplying Factor           Centrifugal  Rotary Reciprocating Diaphragm

Normal duty cycle, operating              1.0     1.0  1.0           1.0
temperature and humidity, air
cleanliness with proper filtration,       1.2     1.2  1.4           1.2
lubrication quality, vibration and        1.1
shock loading                             1.1     1.1  1.4           1.4
                                          1.2
High duty cycle (> 5 cycles per           1.1     1.2  1.1           1.2
/hour)
                                                  1.4  1.3           1.5
Extreme operating temperatures
                                                  1.4  1.1           1.3
Non-scheduled lubrication
check

High vibration level and/or
heavy shock loading

Poor inlet air quality

13.9 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 13, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of
compressors.

2. "A Practical Guide to Compressor Technology", Second Edition, Heinz P. Bloch,
       John Wiley & Sons, 2006

26. Krutzsch, W.C., Pump Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York (1968).

31. Nagel, W.B., "Designing with Rubber," Machine Design (June 23, July 7, July 21,
      Aug 11, 1977).

62. Baumeister, T, et al, Mark's Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers,
      McGraw-Hill Book Company

78. CDNSWC, "Interim Reliability Report on the MC-2A Compressor Unit", January,
     1992

86. "Performance Prediction of Centrifugal Pumps and Compressors", 25th Annual
        Gas Turbine conference and 22nd Annual Fluids Engineering Conference
         Proceedings ASME 1980

Compressors                          13-25                  Revision B
97. " The Chemical Engineering Guide to Compressors", Richard Greene, McGraw
        Hill Publications Company, 1984

108. Daryl Beatty, Dow Chemical Company, "Oil analysis Boosts Compressor
       Reliability". Practicing Oil Analysis Magazine, November 2004

109. Robert Moffatt, Gast Manufacturing Corp., "Prolonging Compressor Life", Machine
       Design, May 11, 1978

128. "Rotary Screw or Reciprocating Air Compressor: Which One is Right?", Bryan
       Fasano and Randy Davis, Gardner Denver, Plant Engineering, September 1998

Compressors  13-26  Revision B
                       14 CHAPTER

                       ELECTRIC MOTORS

14.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     14.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
     14.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF ELECTRIC MOTORS.............................................. 2

        14.2.1 Types of DC Motors .................................................................................. 2
        14.2.2 Types of Single-Phase AC Motors ............................................................ 3
        14.2.3 Types of Polyphase AC Motors ................................................................. 3
     14.3 ELECTRIC MOTOR FAILURE MODES.......................................................... 4
     14.4 MODEL DEVELOPMENT ................................................................................ 6
     14.5 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR MOTOR WINDINGS ....................................... 7
        14.5.1 Base Failure Rate...................................................................................... 8
        14.5.2 Temperature Multiplying Factor................................................................. 9
        14.5.3 Voltage Multiplying Factor ....................................................................... 11
        14.5.4 Altitude Multiplying Factor ....................................................................... 13
        14.5.5 Motor Load .............................................................................................. 13
     14.6 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 18

14.1 INTRODUCTION

     Motors convert electrical energy into mechanical energy and play a very important
part in supplying power for all types of mechanical equipment such as pumps,
compressors and machine tools. They are sometimes classified according to the type
of electricity they require including direct current (DC) or alternating current (AC). If AC,
the motor may be of a single phase or polyphase design. Electric motors are usually
sized in horsepower. The most common sizes are fractional horsepower motors, i.e. 1/2
horsepower or 1/4 horsepower. Larger motors range in size to hundreds of horsepower.

     There are many different types of motors to be analyzed for reliability such as the
split phase motor, capacitor start motor and squirrel cage motor. The split phase motor
is mostly used for "medium starting" applications. It has start and run windings, both are
energized when the motor is started. When the motor reaches about 25% of its full load
speed, a centrifugal switch disconnects the starter winding. The split phase motor is
used where stops and starts are somewhat frequent such as in a refrigerator or air
conditioner compressor.

Electric Motors  14-1  Revision B
     The capacitor start motor has a capacitor in series with a starting winding and
provides more than double the starting torque with one third less starting current than
the split phase motor. Because of this improved starting ability, the capacitor start motor
is used for loads which are hard to start such in a conveyor. The capacitor and starting
windings are disconnected from the circuit by an automatic switch when the motor
reaches about 75% of its rated full load speed.

     A squirrel cage motor includes a rotor with a cylindrical shape containing
longitudinal conductive bars usually made of aluminum or copper set into grooves and
connected together at both ends by shorting rings forming a cage-like shape. The field
windings in the stator set up a rotating magnetic field around the rotor. The relative
motion between this field and the rotation of the rotor induces electric current in the
conductive bars. In turn these currents lengthwise in the conductors react with the
magnetic field of the motor, resulting in torque to turn the shaft. Washing machines and
dishwashers are typical applications for the squirrel cage motor.

     A gear motor is an assembly composed of an electric motor and a reduction gear in
a single unit. A stepper motor converts electrical pulses into specific, rotational
movements. Gear motors consisting of an electric motor and a reduction gear train are
used in those applications requiring high torque at relatively low shaft speed such as in
lifts, winches and garage door openers.

     Electric motors are rated as to such variables as voltage, torque, temperature, and
speed. Speed is usually specified as RPM at no load condition. As the motor is loaded
down, the speed will slow down. If the electric motor is loaded too heavily, the motor
shaft will stop. This stall speed should be avoided in any application. This chapter
contains failure rate models that apply to all types of electric motors that can be used to
support the development of mechanical equipment and provide a reliability estimate for
a new motor application, proposed design modification, or an application that is different
than specified parameters. The models are intended to focus attention on further
design, testing or reliability analysis which should be accomplished to assure the
allocated reliability of the motor in its intended operating environment.

14.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF ELECTRIC MOTORS

14.2.1 Types of DC Motors

     DC motors consist of armature windings inside another set of field windings called
the stator. Applying a voltage to the windings produces a torque in the armature,
resulting in motion. DC motors are classified as either series-wound, shunt-wound, or
compound-wound. In the series-wound motor the field windings and armature windings
are connected in series so that all current that passes through the field windings also
passes through the armature windings. The result is a powerful and efficient motor at
high speed generating high torque for a given current. Speed will vary with load and

Electric Motors            14-2          Revision B
can run away under no-load conditions. In the shunt-wound motor, the armature and
field are both connected across the main power supply in parallel so that the armature
and field currents are separate. Shunt wound motors generate the least torque for a
given current but speed is quite constant with load and will not run away under no-load
conditions. The compound-wound motor has a combination of series and shunt field
windings resulting in a motor that is quite efficient and powerful, yet will not run away
under no-load conditions.

14.2.2 Types of Single-Phase AC Motors

     Most of the single-phase AC motors are induction motors distinguished by different
arrangements for starting. Single-phase motors are used in sizes up to about eight
horsepower for heavy starting duty, chiefly in home and commercial appliances for
which polyphase power is not available.

     The series wound single-phase motor has a rotor winding in series with the stator
winding as in the series-wound DC motor. Since this motor may also be operated on
direct-current, it is called a "universal motor". The series wound motor has a high
starting torque and is used in vacuum cleaners, sewing machines, and portable tools.
In the capacitor-start single-phase motor, an auxiliary winding in the stator is connected
in series with a capacitor and a centrifugal switch. During the starting and accelerating
period the motor operates as a two-phase induction motor. At about two-thirds full-load
speed, the auxiliary circuit is disconnected by the switch and the motor then runs as a
single phase induction motor.

14.2.3 Types of Polyphase AC Motors

     The most extensively used polyphase motors are the induction type such as the
squirrel cage induction motor introduced earlier. The wound-rotor type of induction
motor has a squirrel cage and a series of coils set into the rotor, which are connected
through slip-rings to external variable resistors. By varying the resistance of the wound-
rotor circuits, the amount of current flowing in the circuits, and therefore the speed of the
motor, can be controlled. Induction motors are manufactured with a wide range of
speed and torque characteristics.

     The synchronous motor is another type of polyphase AC motor. Unlike the
induction motor, the rotor of the synchronous motor is connected to a DC supply which
provides a field that rotates in step with the AC field in the stator. The synchronous
motor operates at a constant speed throughout its entire load range, after having been
brought up to this synchronous speed. This speed is governed by the frequency of the
power supply and the number of poles in the rotor.

Electric Motors  14-3  Revision B
14.3 ELECTRIC MOTOR FAILURE MODES

     A motor is one part of a system that includes its source of voltage, mounting
assembly, shaft coupling and driven equipment. The operating environment includes
ambient temperature, airborne contamination, shock and vibration. Motor reliability is
usually associated with bearing life and the life of the windings before they require
rewinding. Bearing failures are normally caused by poor maintenance practices such as
allowing contaminates to enter the motor during lubrication, using the wrong grease or
oil, and applying too much grease and not allowing the bearing to relieve the excess
grease through the drain plug. Loading of the shaft is also a common bearing problem
such as incorrect belt tension, dynamic overloading or misalignment. Chapter 7
provides the procedures for evaluating the bearing for reliability.

      Another prominent failure mode for a motor is the shorting of the motor winding.
Temperature rise is a function of the amount of heat generated in the rotor and stator
per unit of time and the efficiency of the heat transfer system. Temperature rise of the
windings is critical to motor reliability since insulation materials age over a period of time
and this aging process is directly related to temperature. Eventually the materials lose
their insulating properties causing a short circuit of the motor. Winding temperatures
are related to the power losses of the motor (copper and iron). Copper losses occur as
a result of the resistance of the winding and current flow. Iron losses (eddy current
losses) are formed in the core of the motor. As these losses increase as a function of
time and operation, the winding temperature increases. The permitted temperature rise
of the windings is dependent on the class of insulation and temperature limits. Motor
overheating is also caused by motor overloading, too high an ambient temperature and
incorrect applied voltage. Table 14-2 provides temperature ratings for the various
classes of motors.

     Excessive frequency of starts and stops of the motor can also contribute to winding
temperature rise without allowing the motor to cool between starts. The manufacturer
will provide the maximum number of starts and stops per unit time as a function of load
and speed. Limiting the frequency of startups per manufacturer's specifications
provides adherence to predicted failure rate.

     Other modes of motor failure are due to mechanical causes including unbalance,
resonance and rotor deflection. The motor shaft is the most common mechanical
problem caused by a worn or deformed shaft, incorrect coupling, shaft alignment, and
overhung loads. Typical failure modes and their failure causes and effects are listed in
Table 14-1. For additional information on individual parts of the motor, the particular
chapter for that part should be reviewed as shown below:

1. Bearings (See Chapter 7, Section 7.5)
2. Windings (See Table 14.1 below and Section 14.5)
3. Brushes (See Table 14.1 below)

Electric Motors  14-4                                Revision B
4. Armature (shaft) (See Chapter 20, Section 20.2)
5. Stator Housing (casing) (See Table 14.1 below)
6. Gears (See Chapter 8, Section 8.3)

                 Table 14-1. Electric Motor Failure Modes

       FAILURE MODE                 FAILURE CAUSE             FAILURE EFFECT
- Open winding                                            - Motor won't start
- Shorted winding         - Insulation breakdown          - Motor failure
                          - High ambient temperature      - Sparking at brushes
- Worn bearing:           - High altitude
 -- spalling              - Mechanical overload           - Noisy
 --creeping or spin       - Frequent stops and starts     - Heat build-up
                          - Dirt buildup on cooling fins  - Armature rubbing stator
- Cracked housing         - Vibration                     - Motor seized
                          - Mechanical shock
- Sheared armature shaft                                  - Leakage of dust into
- Cracked rotor           - Excessive static load          motor
                          - Belt misalignment
 laminations              - Frequent starts and stops     - Shorted or seized
- Worn brushes                                            - Seized
                            under heavy loads             - Armature rubbing stator
   -- brushes fail open   - Lubrication problem
                          - Contamination                 - Excessive sparking
                          - Overloading or high           - Chatter or hissing noise
                                                          - Motor runs too fast or
                           temperature
                                                           too slow under load
                          - Fatigue                       - Motor won't run
                          - External shock
                          - Vibration

                          - Fatigue
                          - Misalignment
                          - Bearing failure

                          - Improper maintenance
                          - Contamination
                          - High temperature
                          - Improper contact pressure

Electric Motors           14-5                             Revision B
                      Table 14-1. Electric Motor Failure Modes
                                           (continued)

        FAILURE MODE            FAILURE CAUSE          FAILURE EFFECT
- Noisy operation                                 - Heat buildup
                      - Worn or bent shaft
- Motor overheating   - Shaft alignment           - Short motor life
                      - Mechanical vibration      - Motor failure
- Overload tripping   - Base plate distortion
- Bearing failure     - Broken motor mounts       - Motor won't start
                                                  - Noisy operation
                      - Frequent starts           - Motor failure
                      - Incorrect supply voltage
                      - High ambient temperature
                      - Polyphase voltage

                        unbalance > 1%
                      - Motor overload
                      - Blocked ventilation

                      - Incorrect supply voltage
                      - Excessive load speed

                      - Shaft misalignment
                      - Incorrect coupling
                      - Belt misalignment
                      - Incorrect belt tension
                      - Worn bearing

     Additional details of failure modes for those components of a motor such as
bearings and shafts are included in the applicable chapters of this Handbook.

14.4 MODEL DEVELOPMENT

     The failure rate of a motor is affected by such factors as insulation deterioration,
wear of sliding parts, bearing deterioration, torque, load size and type, overhung loads,
thrust loads and rotational speed. The failure rate model included in this section is
based upon identified failure modes of individual parts. The model developed is based
on a fractional or integral horsepower AC type motor, although it will be general enough
to be applied to most DC and AC motors.

     The reliability of an electric motor is dependent upon the reliability of its parts, which
may include: bearings, electrical windings, armature/shaft, housing, gears and brushes.

Electric Motors       14-6                                      Revision B
Failure mechanisms resulting in part degradation and failure rate distribution (as a
function of time) are considered to be independent in each failure rate model. The total
motor system failure rate is the sum of the failure rates of each of the parts in the motor:

        M = (M ,B i CSF ) + WI + BS + ST + AS + BE + GR + C              (14-1)

Where:            M = Total failure rate for the motor system, failures/million hours

                 M,B = Base failure rate of motor, failures/million hours (See Table 14-3)

                 CSF = Motor load service factor (See Table 14-4)

                 WI = Failure rate of electric motor windings, failures/million hours

                           (See Section 14.5)

                 BS = Failure rate of brushes, 3.2 failures/million hours/brush

                           (Reference 68)

                  ST = Failure rate of the stator housing, 0.001 failures/million hours

                           (Reference 68)

                 AS = Failure rate of the armature shaft, failures/million hours

                           (See Chapter 20, Section 20.4)

                 BE = Failure rate of bearings, failures/million hours (See Chapter 7)

                 GR = Failure rate of gears, failures/million hours (See Chapter 8)

                  C = Failure rate of capacitor (if applicable) See MIL-HDBK-217,

                           (Reference 28)

14.5 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR MOTOR WINDINGS

     The life expectancy of a motor winding is primarily dependant on its operating
temperature with respect to the permitted temperature rise of the winding. The
temperature rise of the winding is a function of the motor design, insulation materials
and the operating environment including shaft loading, duty cycle, altitude, and
operating temperature. The insulation materials age over time and this aging process is
directly related to temperature. Eventually, the materials lose their insulating properties
and break down causing one or more short circuits.

     Temperature rise occurs in a motor due to the losses that occur in the motor,
normally copper and iron losses. The temperature inside the motor will depend on how
effectively this heat can be removed by the cooling system of the motor. The difference

Electric Motors  14-7                                        Revision B
between the internal and external temperatures is dependent on the thermal gradient
and this difference is normally quite low.

    The electric motor windings failure rate, WI, is derived by Equation (14-2):

                          WI = WI ,B i CT i CV i Calt                     (14-2)

Where:           WI,B = Base failure rate of the electric motor windings, failures/million

                            hours (See Section 14.5.1)

                   CT = Multiplying factor which considers the effects of ambient

                            temperature on the base failure rate (See Section 14.5.2 and
                             Figure 14.1)

                   CV = Multiplying factor which considers the effects of electrical source

                            voltage variations (See Section 14.5.3 and Figure 14.2 for single
                            phase motors or Figure 14.3 for three phase motors)

                  Calt = Multiplying factor which considers the effects of operation at

                            high altitudes (See Section 14.5.4 and Figure 14.4)

14.5.1 Base Failure Rate

    WI,B is the base failure rate of the specific motor winding as supplied by the motor

manufacturer. The winding will usually be specified in terms of expected life. The base
failure rate is then:

                          WI ,B  =  1.0 x106                              (14-3)
                                       LI

Where:           WI,B = Failure rate, failures/million hours

and:             LI = Expected winding life, hours

     If a manufacturer's winding life is not available, a winding life of 25,000 hours

(failure rate WI,B = 40.0 failures/million hours) can be expected from most

manufacturers (References 28 and 105). The multiplying factors for Equation (14-2)
are described in the following paragraphs.

Electric Motors                     14-8                      Revision B
14.5.2 Temperature Multiplying Factor

     Temperature is the primary factor that limits the life of motor windings. Heat causes
the windings to age and deteriorate, so after time they break down and lose their
insulation quality. When this happens, the related electrical components "short" and
the motor burns out.

     The manufacturer's rating of a motor based on insulation and expected life is
provided in 25oC increments. The temperature rating for each class of insulation is
defined as the maximum temperature at which the insulation can be operated to yield
the rated winding life. The temperature rating for the various classes of insulation is
shown in Table 14-2.

                                   Table 14-2. Motor Insulation Ratings

Insulation       Temperature    Assumed    Allowable  Hot
   Class             Rating      Ambient
                              Temperature  Temperature Spot
      A               *
      B                            **      Rise       Allowance
      F               105o C
      H               130o C     40 o C    60 o C     5o C
                      155o C               85 o C     5o C
                      180o C     40 o C    110 o C    5o C
                                           135 o C    5o C
                                 40 o C

                                 40 o C

   * Maximum operating temperature allowed which includes ambient temperature,

allowable temperature rise and a hot spot allowance. Manufacturers may use a mixture
of materials in their motors providing a higher allowable temperature than the listed
temperature rating for the insulation which permits a higher allowable ambient
temperature. Refer to manufacturer's specification if in doubt.

   ** After adding the ambient temperature + temperature rise + hot spot

temperature, any difference between this sum and temperature rating can be applied to
ambient temperature

     Allowable temperature rise in Table 14-2 is the change in winding temperature from
when the motor starts to the final elevated temperature under full load conditions. This
temperature is above the ambient temperature around the motor prior to starting the
motor. Temperature rise means that the heat produced in the motor windings, friction of
the bearings, rotor and stator losses will continue to increase until the heat dissipation
equals the heat being generated. A motor is designed so the temperature rise

Electric Motors               14-9                    Revision B
produced within the motor, when delivering its rated horsepower, and added to the
industry standard 40oC ambient temperature rating and an allowance for hot spots will
not exceed the winding insulation temperature limit for that particular insulation class.
There will be hot spots in the winding which are not measured by the normal resistance
measurement that measures the mean temperature rise of the winding. Thus, a hot
spot allowance is introduced into the difference between the temperature rating and the
temperature limit (ambient temperature plus the temperature rise).

     Ambient temperature in Table 14-2 above is the temperature of the air surrounding
the motor or the room temperature in the vicinity of the motor. The temperature will
obviously be higher than room temperature if the motor is operating in an enclosed
cabinet. Ambient temperatures in Table 14-2 are assumed values established
sufficiently high for most applications so that the following relationship between the
temperatures can be used to prevent motor overheating.

     Temperature Rating = Ambient Temperature + Temperature Rise + Hot Spot
Allowance.

     The winding temperature is determined by measuring both the ambient and the hot
temperature resistances of the windings. The resistance measurement gives an
average temperature which is more representative than spot measurements with a
thermometer. This method has become standard because of the dimensional
restrictions of so many motor designs, which prevent the use of thermometers. Since
temperature measurements provide an average temperature, a standard hot spot
temperature is provided in the table to consider hot spots in the winding not detected by
the resistance measurements.

     The equation for determining the motor winding temperature from resistance
readings is as follows:

                 Trise  =  RH -   RC  (K +TC )                                (14-4)
                              RC

Where:           Trise = Temperature Rise, oC
                 RH = Hot winding resistance, ohms
                 RC = Cold winding resistance, ohms
                 TC = Cold temperature, oC

                    K = 234.5 (a copper temperature coefficient)

     Allowing a motor to reach and operate at a temperature 10oC above its maximum
temperature rating shown in Table 14-2 will reduce the motor's expected life by 50%

Electric Motors            14-10                                  Revision B
Operating at 10oC above this, the motor's life will be reduced again by 50%. The same
relationship exists in reverse if the motor is operated at a temperature 10oC below the

rated temperature. For example, if a manufacturer provides a motor with an insulation

Class F for a B Class environment, the motor can be expected to last four times as long.

     As a result of this relationship between temperature and winding life, a failure rate
multiplying factor considering the motor operating temperature is given by:

                 C = 2 (TO - 40) /10                                   (14-5)
                    T

Where: To = Ambient temperature surrounding motor with motor running at

                       expected full load conditions, oC (See notes following)

Note 1 ­ If the temperature rise of the motor is known as a result of hot and

       cold resistance measurements To can be adjusted accordingly. For

         example, if the temperature rise of a Class F motor is found to be
         100oC as opposed to 110 oC as shown in Table 14-2, this 10 oC

       differential can be applied to To reducing its value by 10 oC.

Note 2 ­ In determining To the installation location of the motor must be

         considered such as inside an equipment cabinet, next to other

         operating equipment, etc.

Figure 14.1 shows the effect of temperature on the base failure rate.

14.5.3 Voltage Multiplying Factor

     To drive an existing mechanical load connected to the shaft, a motor must draw a
fixed amount of power from the source. When the motor is subjected to voltages below
the rated value, current must be increased to provide the same amount of power. This
increase in current is a problem only if that current exceeds the motor's current rating.
When the amperage is above the rated value, heat begins to build up in the motor
increasing the probability of motor winding failure.

     If the existing mechanical load is light, a decreased supply voltage will create an
increase in current in approximately the same proportion as the voltage decrease. This
change does not create a problem if the current remains within rated value. However,
for a heavy mechanical load, the winding current is already high, possibly causing a
voltage that may be lower than that without the load. Thus, any further decrease in
voltage increases the probability of a current above rated value and overheating of the
motor. Also, the current required to start a motor is much higher than for steady-state
operation. Frequent starting as a result of a high operational duty cycle can contribute
to an increase in voltage drop and must also be considered in determining the
difference between actual and rated source voltage.

Electric Motors                    14-11  Revision B
      When the motor is subjected to a source voltage higher than rated value, the
magnetic field of the motor can approach flux density saturation causing the motor to
draw more current in an effort to magnetize the iron beyond the saturation point. This
increase in amperage creates a corresponding increase in the probability of motor
overheating. A failure rate multiplying factor can be established for those situations
when the actual voltage is expected to differ from rated voltage:

For single phase motors:

                          CV = 2 10 (VD VR )                                      (14-6)

Where VD = Difference between rated and actual voltage
         VR = Rated voltage

Figure 14.2 shows the effect of voltage differential on the base failure rate.

      For three phase motors, the voltage for all three phases must be equaled
(balanced) so that the current values will be the same in each phase winding. When the
voltages between the three phases are not equaled (unbalanced), the current increases
dramatically in the motor windings causing premature motor failure. To determine the
voltage unbalance, the average voltage of the three phases (AB, AC, BC) is measured
and the average voltage determined. The average voltage is then subtracted from one
of the voltages that will indicate the greatest voltage difference. This (greatest voltage
difference divided by the average voltage) x 100 provides the percent voltage
unbalance.

      The industry standard recommends that the maximum voltage unbalance be limited
to 1%. A motor should never be operated with a voltage unbalance exceeding 3%. A
failure rate multiplying factor for voltage unbalance can be established as follows:

For three phase motors:

                          CV = 1 + (0.40 VU )2.5                                  (14-7)

                                                     greatest voltage difference

Where: VU = % voltage unbalance = 100 x average phase voltage

Electric Motors           14-12                   Revision B
   And: VU = 0% to 3%

Figure 14.3 shows the effect of voltage unbalance of the base failure rate.

14.5.4 Altitude Multiplying Factor

     Motors operating up to and including 3,300 feet can be considered as operating at
sea level. Above 3,300 the low density air does not allow a motor to cool as well as the
air at sea-level. However, the decrease in ambient temperature characteristic of high
altitudes somewhat compensates for the increase in temperature rise due to low air
density. The altitude multiplying factor considers the difference between the effect of
lower ambient temperature and loss of cooling capability. The following equation
provides an altitude multiplying factor.

         For operating altitudes > 3300 feet:

                 Calt = 1.00 + 8 x10-5 (a - 3300 ft)                          (14-8)

                 Where a = Operating altitude in feet

    For altitudes  3300 ft, Calt = 1.0
Figure 14.4 shows the effect of operating altitude on the base failure rate.

14.5.5 Motor Load

     When a motor is operated at full load it has a given temperature rise. Operating the
motor at loads above the manufacturer's specifications increases the motor temperature
rise and increases the probability of early failure. It is assumed in the motor base failure
rate equation that the torque and loading limits of the motor are not exceeded. Table
14-4 provides failure rate multiplying factors for severe loading.

Electric Motors  14-13                                 Revision B
Temperature Multiplying Factor, CT  20.0
                                    18.0
                                    16.0      10  20  30  40     50  60             70                80
                                    14.0
                                    12.0
                                    10.0

                                     8.0
                                     6.0
                                     4.0
                                     2.0
                                     0.0

                                           0

                                                      Ambient Temperature T O , oC

Where:                                        C = 2 (TO - 40) /10
                                                 T

                                              To = Ambient temperature surrounding motor with motor running at

                                                      expected full load conditions (See notes following Equation 14-5)

                                              Figure 14.1 Ambient Temperature Multiplying Factor, CT

Electric Motors                                           14-14                         Revision B
Voltage Differential Multiplying Factor, CV  18.0
                                             16.0
                                             14.0       0.10  0.20   0.30                                       0.40
                                             12.0
                                             10.0

                                              8.0
                                              6.0
                                              4.0
                                              2.0
                                              0.0

                                                  0.00

                                                        Voltage Differential / Rated Voltage, V D /V R , volts

       CV = 2 10 (VD VR )

Where VD = Difference between rated and actual voltage
         VR = Rated voltage

           Figure 14.2 Supply Voltage Differential Multiplying Factor

Electric Motors                                               14-15                                             Revision B
Voltage Unbalance Multiplying Factor, CV  5.0
                                          4.0
                                          3.0      1.00  2.00   3.00                             4.00
                                          2.0
                                          1.0
                                          0.0

                                             0.00

                                                         Phase Voltage Unbalnnce, V U , percent

                CV = 1 + (0.40 VU )2.5

                                                     greatest voltage difference

Where: VU = % voltage unbalance = 100 x average phase voltage

                                                   Figure 14.3 Voltage Unbalance Multiplying Factor

Electric Motors                                          14-16                                       Revision B
                                   2.5

Altitude Multiplying Factor, Calt  2.0

                                   1.5

                                   1.0

                                   0.5

                                        0  2  4  6  8  10     12  14                            16  18

                                                    Operating Altitude, a , 1000 feet

                                                Calt = 1.00 + 8 x10-5 (a - 3300 ft)
                                        Where a = Operating altitude in feet

                                                       Figure 14.4 Altitude Multiplying Factor

Electric Motors                                        14-17                                        Revision B
                 Table 14-3 Base Failure Rate of Motor, M,B

                       Type of Motor             M,B

                 DC                   (failures/million hours)
                 DC brushless                2.17
                 AC single phase             1.75
                 AC polyphase                6.90

                                           10.00

                 Table 14-4 Motor Load Service Factor, CSF

Load Type        Load Description                               CSF

Uniform Load     One way continuous operation, minimal          1.00
Light Impact     load fluctuation, no shock or vibration        1.50
Medium Impact
Heavy Impact     Frequent starting and stopping, stepping       2.00
                 motor operation, minimal shock and             3.00
                 vibration

                 Frequent bidirectional, reversible motor
                 operation, moderate load impact ,shock
                 and vibration

                 Subject to heavy vibration, shock loads,
                 heavy load fluctuations

14.6 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 14, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of
electric motors.

28. MIL-HDBK-217, "Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment"

Electric Motors                       14-18                     Revision B
68. H. Wayne Beaty and James L. Kirtley, Jr., Electric Motor Handbook,
       McGraw-Hill Book Company 1998

105. OREDA Offshore Reliability Data, 5th Edition Det Norske Veritas, N-1363 Hovik,
       Norway 2009 ISBN 978-82-14-04830-8

127. Explaining Motor Failure, Austin Bonnett and Chuck Young EASA, EC&M
       Magazine, October 1, 2004

132. "Temperature Monitoring Is Key to Motor Reliability", Thomas H. Bishop, Electrical
       Apparatus Service Association, Maintenance Technology Magazine, July 2004

Electric Motors  14-19  Revision B
                 This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Electric Motors  14-20                               Revision B
                    15 CHAPTER

                    ACCUMULATORS

15.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     15.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
     15.2 FAILURE MODES............................................................................................ 3
     15.3 FAILURE RATE MODEL ................................................................................. 4

        15.3.1 Seals ......................................................................................................... 5
        15.3.2 Springs ...................................................................................................... 5
        15.3.3 Piston and Cylinder ................................................................................... 5
        15.3.4 Valves ....................................................................................................... 6
        15.3.5 Structural Considerations .......................................................................... 6
     15.4 THIN WALL CYLINDERS ................................................................................ 7
     15.5 THICK WALL CYLINDERS............................................................................ 10
     15.6 FAILURE RATE CALCULATIONS................................................................. 11
     15.7 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 13

15.1 INTRODUCTION

     A hydraulic accumulator is a device designed to store energy. In a hydraulic
system, fluid is pumped into the accumulator through a one-way valve. The
accumulator holds the energy under pressure using a spring, compressed gas or raised
weight which is used to exert a force against an incompressible fluid. The accumulator
also has an output valve that is opened upon demand to supply fluid to other
components of the system. An accumulator is used to store energy in such applications
as:

             · Fluid supply

             · System pressure surge damping and shock suppression

             · Stabilization of pressure fluctuations

             · Leakage and thermal expansion compensation

             · Emergency and standby power source

     An accumulator is also used to smooth out the delivery flow of pumps. The pump
may deliver the required power to the system in a pulsating flow which can produce

Accumulators  15-1  Revision B
pulsations detrimental to a high pressure system. An accumulator properly located in
the hydraulic system will substantially cushion these pressure pulsations. In many
hydraulic power applications the valve, actuator or other driven component stops or
closes suddenly, creating a pressure wave that travels back through the system. This
shock wave can develop peak pressures several times greater than normal working
pressures causing objectionable noise or pump failure. An accumulator properly
located in the hydraulic system will minimize this shock wave.

     An accumulator design may include input and output valves, bladder, bleed plug, a
high strength shell, piston, and fluid port. Typical accumulator designs are shown in
Figure 15.1.

                               Figure 15.1 Typical Accumulator Designs

     A dead load accumulator is comprised of a single acting vertical cylinder which
raises a heavy load mass. It can be designed for large volumes but correspondingly
heavy weights are needed resulting in a large physical size. The advantage of this type
of accumulator design is the constant discharge pressure, whereas all other types
exhibit a variation in pressure with respect to volume of fluid stored.

     A spring loaded accumulator contains a single spring or several springs which move
within a cylinder. As the volume of fluid in the accumulator is increased, the spring is
compressed and the spring force is increased. The minimum pressure in the
accumulator depends on the designed spring preload. The piston stroke and, therefore,
the volume of fluid which can be stored is limited by the physical characteristics of the
spring.

     A gas loaded accumulator is designed to utilize a compressed gas such as nitrogen
or air to pressurize the stored fluid. The accumulator may be a piston type, diaphragm
type or bladder type to separate the noncompressable fluid and gas. Gas loaded
accumulators can be very large. As discussed in the next section, accumulators are
usually designed to be operated in the vertical position. The fluid pressure as a function

Accumulators  15-2  Revision B
of fluid volume in a gas loaded accumulator depends upon many factors such as the
gas being used, the temperature of the gas and its pressure-volume characteristics.

15.2 FAILURE MODES

     Accumulator failure is often defined as the inability to accept and exhaust a
specified amount of fluid when operating over a specific system pressure range. Failure
often results from unwanted loss or gain of precharge pressure. Correct precharge
pressure is probably the single most important fact in prolonging the life of the
accumulator.

     In any type of accumulator utilizing a piston, the cylinder bore has to be machined,
and wear will occur between the piston and cylinder body. Seals are built into the piston
and these are subject to wear and leakage. Depending on the accumulator application,
response time may be a factor. The response of the dead load accumulator will be
somewhat slow due to the high inertia of the load and piston. The response of spring
loaded accumulators will depend on the age of the spring and its modulus of rigidity. A
response of a piston type accumulator will be adversely affected by the inertia of the
piston and the effect of seal stiction. Typical accumulator failure modes are listed in
Table 15-1.

     If a piston type accumulator is inclined to a vertical position, the rate of wear will be
increased due to the additional side load. Failure of a piston type accumulator tends to
be gradual caused by deterioration of piston seals and wear in the cylinder bore.
Failure of a diaphragm type accumulator will be more sudden, caused by the rupturing
of the diaphragm. The failure rate of a diaphragm type accumulator may also depend
on its physical characteristics.

     A spring loaded accumulator must be evaluated closely for reliability to verify
compatibility between the spring material and the surrounding medium. Any leakage
past the seal could have a deteriorating effect on the spring material and its
compression properties or fatigue life.

     One of the main applications of an accumulator is the damping of fluid system
pulsations or surges. The system effects of these pulsations must be evaluated as part
of any reliability analysis. In some applications the pulsations are unimportant as they
are partially smoothed by pipes upstream of the pump. A critical element of the
reliability analysis is the probability of failure of other system components caused by
accumulator failure. For example, a failed valve assembly within the accumulator which
prevents fluid discharge may not be immediately detected and damage to other
components may occur due to pressure transients. Shock waves produced as a result
of the sudden closing of a downstream valve, for example, travels through the system
fluid to the far end of the system and a decompression wave is formed which travels
back to the valve. These waves travel back and forth until the energy is expended. The

Accumulators  15-3  Revision B
more rapid the valve closure, the more severe the pressure transient generated.
Without detection of an accumulator failure, severe degradation and damage to system
components could be occurring without operator or maintainer knowledge.

                  Table 15-1. Failure Modes for an Accumulator

FAILURE MODE      FAILURE CAUSE                        FAILURE EFFECT

Seal Leakage      - Embrittlement                - Leakage past piston
                  - Wear                         - Internal leakage at valve
                  - Distortion                   - External leakage
                  - Incompatibility with medium

Worn cylinder     - Contaminants                 - Poor system response
bore or piston
surface           - Interaction with fluid medium - Leakage

                                                 - Loss of pressure

Loss of spring    - Corrosion                    - Poor system response
tension           - Fracture                     - Inoperative accumulator
                  - Spring misalignment

Piston stiction   - Surface wear                 - Poor system response
                  - Corrosion

Loss of pressure  - Ruptured gas bag             - Poor system response
                  - External leakage             - External component damage

Leakage of charge - Leakage past piston or bag   - Poor system response
                                                 - Contaminated fluid system
gas into fluid    - Sudden discharge of fluid

system            from accumulator

Inoperative       - Jammed output valve          - External component damage
accumulator

15.3 FAILURE RATE MODEL
     The failure rate of an accumulator will depend on several factors:
         · Volumetric capacity
         · Operating pressure
         · Maximum flow rate

Accumulators                          15-4                               Revision B
     The failure rate of an accumulator is dependent on the sum of the failure rates of its
component parts:

               = + + + +                      (15-1)

                A SE SP PC VA CW

Where:         A = Total failure rate of accumulator, failures/million hours

              SE = Failure rate of seals, failures/million hours (See Chapter 3)

              SP = Failure rate of springs, failures/million hours (See Chapter 4)

              PC = Failure rate of piston/cylinder interface, failures/million hours

                        (See Chapter 9)

              VA = Failure rate of control valve, failures/million hours

                        (See Chapter 6)

              CW = Failure rate of cylinder wall, failures/million hours (See Section

                       15.4 for thin walled cylinders and Section 15.5 for thick walled
                       cylinders)

15.3.1 Seals

     Specific failure modes of seals and procedures to determine their failure rates under
different operating environments are discussed in Chapter 3. Of particular interest in
the design evaluation of accumulators and other pressure vessels is the compatibility of
the fluid medium and the seal material. The position of the accumulator in the fluid
system must also be known to determine the side load on the piston and corresponding
stress on the seal.

15.3.2 Springs

     Specific failure modes of springs and procedures to determine their failure rates
under different operating environments are discussed in Chapter 4. For most
accumulators the failure rate equations in Chapter 4 for static springs can be used. The
reliability of a spring is very sensitive to corrosion and the compatibility of the fluid and
spring material must be considered.

15.3.3 Piston and Cylinder

     The wear rate of the piston surface and cylinder bore will be sensitive to the position
of the accumulator in its operating environment. Tilting of the accumulator from its

Accumulators                15-5  Revision B
vertical position will alter the side load of the piston. This parameter and others
affecting the reliability of the piston/cylinder are included in the reliability equations
contained in Chapter 9.

15.3.4 Valves

     The reliability of valve assemblies which may be contained within the accumulator is
determined using the equations contained in Chapter 6. Rate of flow into and out of the
accumulator will affect the overall compressor reliability. Another failure mode to be
considered in the design evaluation is the possibility of a sudden discharge of fluid from
the output valve causing it to operate without fluid and creating an air lock.

15.3.5 Structural Considerations

     The fluid contained within an accumulator under pressure creates stresses in the
walls as shown in Figure 15.2. The state of stress is triaxial. A longitudinal or
meridional stress acts parallel to the meridian; a circumferential, or hoop stress acts
parallel to the circumference; and a radial stress acts outward at the surface. If the
walls of the accumulator are relatively thin (thickness t is less than one-tenth the radius

ri) and of uniform shape, longitudinal and circumferential stresses will be uniform

throughout the thickness of the wall. The radial stress, although varying from zero at
the outside surface to a value equal to the internal pressure at the inside surface can be
considered negligible. Section 15.4 provides equations for determining the stress levels
of thin walled pressure vessels (t/ri <0.1) and Section 15.5 provides equations for
determining the stress levels of thick walled pressure vessels (t/ri >0.1).

              Figure 15.2 Stresses created in walls of accumulator

Accumulators  15-6  Revision B
15.4 THIN WALL CYLINDERS

     The shell thickness is designed to keep the maximum stresses below the yield
strength of the material. The design thickness is the minimum required thickness
computed by code formula plus an allowance for corrosion.

     The walls of the accumulator will tend to expand in the radial direction when
pressurized, causing the walls to stretch circumferentially. As a result of this radial
expansion, stresses will occur acting in the circumferential direction. For thin walled
cylinders, the circumferential strains are approximately the same at the inside and
outside of the cylinder. Consequently, the circumferential stresses will be very nearly
uniform throughout the wall thickness. The circumferential stresses can be related to
the internal pressure of the accumulator by considering the equilibrium of a half cylinder
shown in Figure 15.2 above. For equilibrium to occur, the resistive force due to
circumferential stress acting on the cylinder wall must equal the force acting on
accumulator wall as a result of applied fluid pressure. This equilibrium is shown with the
following equation (Reference 38):

              FC = 2 c t L - 2 P ri L = 0                      (15-2)

Where:        Fc = Circumferential force, lbs
              P = Internal pressure, lbs/in2

              ri = Internal radius, in

              L = Cylinder length, in

              c = Circumferential stress, lbs/in2

              t = Wall thickness, in

    Solving for c, the circumferential stress, in the cylinder results in the following

equation:

               = P ri                                          (15-3)
              C  t

     Similarly, the equilibrium of forces in the longitudinal direction provides the following
equation:

              F1 =  P ri 2 - 2  ri t  l                        (15-4)

Accumulators           15-7                        Revision B
Where:        Fl = Longitudinal force, lbs
               l = Longitudinal stress, lbs/in2

and the corresponding longitudinal stress is:

              l  =  P ri                                     (15-5)
                    2t

     The effects of end plates and joints on the accumulator are a reduction in strength
of the accumulator due to riveted joints, welding and other fabrication techniques. This
reduction is accounted for by including a joint efficiency parameter in the circumferential
and longitudinal stress equations:

                          = minimum strength of joint

                                   strength of solid material

Where:         = Joint efficiency parameter

    The addition of c as a circumferential joint efficiency parameter provides the

following equation:

              c  =  P ri                                     (15-6)
                    t c

and the addition of l as a longitudinal joint efficiency factor provides the following

equation:

              l  =   P ri                                    (15-7)
                    2 t l

     The relative strength (efficiency) of a joint depends upon its design and type of joint.

Table 15-2 provides values of c and l based on joint efficiencies that may be

expected in the various types of joints if they are well designed. The actual value for the

efficiency parameters, c and l, from Table 15-2 below can be adjusted depending on

the confidence level in manufacturing techniques and quality control.

Accumulators              15-8                   Revision B
              Table 15-2. Approximate Efficiencies of Joints (Ref. 57, 58)

                TYPE OF JOINT          DESIGN       c , l
              Riveted Lap Joint
              Riveted Butt Joint  (Number of Rows)   0.55
                                                     0.65
              Welded Butt Joint         Single       0.75
                                        Double       0.65
                                         Triple      0.75
                                        Single       0.85
                                        Double       0.90
                                         Triple      0.75
                                     Quadruple       0.85
                                        Single
                                        Double

     The ends of the accumulator are often hemispheres. The internal pressure in a thin
spherical shell will create two mutually perpendicular circumferential stresses of equal
magnitude and a radial stress. Again, a thickness/radius ratio of less than 1/10 provides

a minimal value of radial stress. The resistive force due to circumferential stress, c,

acting on the accumulator wall to achieve equilibrium must equal the force on the

hemisphere due to internal pressure, P:

              Fhc =  P rh2 - 2  rh th  hc = 0                               (15-8)

Where:            Fhc = Circumferential force of the end section, lbs

                     P = Internal fluid pressure, lbs/in2

                    rh = Radius of the end section, in
                    th = Thickness of the end section material, in
                  hc = Circumferential stress in the end section, lbs/in2

    Solving for hc, with the addition of a joint efficiency parameter, provides an

equation for maximum stress at the hemispherical ends.

Accumulators                      15-9                     Revision B
               hc   =   P rh                                        (15-9)
                       2 th c

     It will be noted that for the same wall thickness, the spherical ends of the
accumulator provide twice the strength. The hemispherical ends, therefore, are
sometimes thinner than the cylindrical section. Equations for various shapes of
accumulators can be found in standard textbooks for s more detailed structural analysis.

     The failure rate of the cylinder is determined by a base failure rate for the cylinder
multiplied by stress level factors:

              CW = CW ,B + c + l                        (15-10)

Where:         CW = Failure rate of cylinder for use in Equation (15-1),

                          failures/million hours

              CW,B = Base failure rate of cylinder, 0.001 failures/million hours

                c = Failure rate considering compressive stress (See Section

                          15.6)

                l = Failure rate considering longitudinal stress (See Section

                           15.6)

15.5 THICK WALL CYLINDERS

     If the wall thickness of the pressure vessel is more than one-tenth the radius, the
circumferential and longitudinal stresses cannot be considered uniform throughout the
thickness of the wall and the radial stress cannot be considered negligible. Reference
38 provides the equations for different shapes of thick walled containers:

              l  =   P ri2                              (15-11)
                    ro2 - ri2

Where:         l = Longitudinal stress, lbs/in2
              P = Internal pressure, lbs/in2
              ri = Internal radius of the cylinder, in
              ro = External radius of the cylinder, in

Accumulators           15-10                            Revision B
                 (( )) cP ri2
                 =       r2     ro2 + r 2              (15-12)
                                ro2 - ri2

Where:        c = Circumferential stress, lbs/in2
               r = Average radius of the cylinder, in

              (( )) r
              =  P ri2  ro2 - r 2                      (15-13)
                   r2   ro2 - ri2

Where:        r = Radial stress, lbs/in2

     The failure rate of the cylinder is determined by a base failure rate for the cylinder
multiplied by stress level factors:

                 CW = CW ,B + c + l + r                (15-14)

Where:          CW = Failure rate of cylinder wall for use in Equation (15-1),

                           failures/million hours

              CW,BB = Base failure rate of cylinder, 0.001 failures/million hours
                 c = Failure rate considering circumferential stress (See Section 15.6)
                 l = Failure rate considering longitudinal stress (See Section 15.6)
                 r = Failure rate considering radial stress (See Section 15.6)

15.6 FAILURE RATE CALCULATIONS

     The structural aspects of the accumulator failure rate depend on the stress/strength
relationships of the materials. The standard definition of reliability includes the
probability that the strength random variable will exceed the stress random variable as
shown in Figure 15.3.

              R = P (S > s) = P (S - s) > 0            (15-15)

Accumulators                    15-11                  Revision B
Where:        R = Reliability
              P = Probability
              S = Strength random variable
              s = Stress random variable

              Figure 15.3 Stress Strength Relationship

     The stress variable includes any parameter that tends to introduce a failure of the
accumulator while the strength variable indicates any parameter resisting failure.
Failure is defined to have occurred when actual stress exceeds actual strength for the
first time. The ratio of strength to stress provides a safety factor:

              n  =  Fy                                            (15-16)

                    x

Where:         n = Factor of safety
              Fy = Material yield strength, lbs/in2
              x = Mean value for the stress, c, l, or r, lbs/in2

     A reliability analysis must include an estimate of the tail probabilities for stress and
strength variables based on previous experience and intimate knowledge of the design
and operating environment. The lower and upper limits on these probabilities quantify
the uncertainty of the estimates. The probability distributions of yield strengths for
steels are found to be normally distributed.

Accumulators            15-12                           Revision B
The standard normal variable of (S - s) will be equal to:

              z = S - s                                    (15-17)
                     S2 + s2

Where:         z = Probability density function
              S = Mean value of Fy, lbs/in2
              s = Mean value of x, lbs/in2
              S = Standard deviation of strength
              s = Standard deviation of stress

     The probability density factor can be converted to reliability and failure rate using

cumulative standard normal distribution tables and assuming R = e-t .

15.7 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 15, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of
accumulators.

22. Howell, Glen W. and Terry M. Weathers, Aerospace Fluid Component Designers'
Handbook, Volumes I and II, TRW Systems Group, Redondo Beach, CA prepared for
Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, Edwards, CA, Report AD 874 542 and Report
AD 874 543 (February 1970)

38. Roack and Young, Formulas for Stress and Strain, McGraw-Hill Book Company,
New York (1975)

46. Fox, R.W., and A.T. McDonald, Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, John Wiley and
Sons, New York (1978)

57. Deutschman, A.D., et al, Machine Design, Theory and Practice, MacMillan
Publishing Co., NY (1985)

58. Parmley, R.O., Mechanical Components Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY
(1985)

Accumulators  15-13                                        Revision B
              This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Accumulators  15-14                               Revision B
                          16 CHAPTER

                    THREADED FASTENERS

16.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     16.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
        16.1.1 Externally Threaded Fasteners ................................................................. 2
        16.1.2 Internally Threaded Fasteners................................................................... 2
        16.1.3 Locking Mechanisms................................................................................. 2
        16.1.4 Threads ..................................................................................................... 3

     16.2 FAILURE MODES............................................................................................ 4
        16.2.1 Hydrogen Embrittlement............................................................................ 4
        16.2.2 Fatigue ...................................................................................................... 5
        16.2.3 Temperature.............................................................................................. 5
        16.2.4 Load and Torque ....................................................................................... 5
        16.2.5 Bolt and Nut Compatibility ......................................................................... 6
        16.2.6 Vibration .................................................................................................... 7

     16.3 STRESS-STRENGTH MODEL DEVELOPMENT ............................................ 7
        16.3.1 Static Preload ............................................................................................ 7
        16.3.2 Temperature Effects of Fasteners in Clamped Joints................................ 8
        16.3.3 Corrosion Considerations ........................................................................ 10
        16.3.4 Dynamic Loading..................................................................................... 12
        16.3.5 Determination of Base Failure Rate ........................................................ 13

     16.4 FAILURE RATE MODEL ............................................................................... 13
        16.4.1 Size Multiplying Factor ............................................................................ 14
        16.4.2 Alternate Loading Multiplying Factor ....................................................... 14
        16.4.3 Temperature Multiplying Factor............................................................... 15
        16.4.4 Cyclic Shock/Impact Loading Multiplying Factor ..................................... 15
        16.4.5 Thread Correction Multiplying Factor ...................................................... 15

     16.5 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 21

16.1 INTRODUCTION

     Methods of fastening or joining components include bolting, brazing, soldering, and
bonding with adhesives. One advantage of threaded fasteners is that they permit
disassembly of the equipment for maintenance and repair. Threaded fasteners also
allow the use of automated as well as standard manual tools for assembly and
installation procedures enhancing operational reliability. The reliability of threaded
fasteners in a given operating environment depends on the strength of materials,

Threaded Fasteners  16-1  Revision B
methods of fabrication and assembly, and the stress levels created by fatigue loads and
environmental conditions. This chapter considers the reliability performance of
externally and internally threaded fasteners. Other fasteners such as rivets and pin
fasteners are discussed in Chapter 23.

16.1.1 Externally Threaded Fasteners

     Bolts and screws are fasteners with a formed head on one end and an external
thread on the other end. Studs are fasteners that incorporate external threads at each
end. Structural bolts and screws are installed through prepared holes in the material to
be joined. Various lengths of bolts and screws are produced to accommodate the
thickness of the material to be fastened and the additional length of thread needed for
proper engagement with the nut or with the internal tapped thread. These fasteners are
subjected to tensile, shear, bending, and fatigue loads sensed by the joint. Failure rate
is also subject to the environment imposed on the joint, which may include temperature
extremes or exposure to various corrosive conditions.

16.1.2 Internally Threaded Fasteners

     Specific fastening devices which incorporate internal (female) threads include nuts
and inserts. They are intended to engage with the external threads of bolts, screws,
and studs, and should be compatible to develop the full rated strength of the external
thread.

16.1.3 Locking Mechanisms

     One aspect of threaded fastener performance that is of concern is the fastener's
susceptibility to loosening as a result of severe vibration or dynamic loadings acting on
the joint. Since vibratory stresses cannot be totally eliminated, several methods have
been developed which have proven effective in maintaining fastener integrity.

     Self-locking nuts are integral fasteners which incorporate in the nut element a
controlled high-torque feature which is designed to prevent rotation of the external
threads, even if the initial tightening torque is completely relaxed. The same principle of
an inherent self-locking feature is often extended to screws used in tapped holes.

     Chemical thread-locking systems include adhesives which are applied to the
fastener threads before installation, and which cure and effect a permanent bond after
assembly.

     Cotter pins are a supplemental locking device used with a slotted or castellated
nut. They are installed through a drilled hole in the bolt threads to prevent rotation or
movement of the nut after installation.

Threaded Fasteners  16-2  Revision B
     Safety lock wiring is also a supplemental locking system. Usually two or more
fasteners in series must be wired to prevent rotation in the "off" direction. The nut end
can be wired using slotted or castellated nuts and bolts with drilled holes. However, the
predominant use of safety wiring is to secure screw heads which have been drilled to
accommodate the wire where the screws have been installed in tapped or blind holes.

     Lockwashers are used to resist the loosening effects of vibration, and come in a
wide variety of designs for various applications. Conical spring washers are typically
made of hardened and tempered steel that is slightly concaved. These washers deform
when the bolt is tightened, acting as a spring that compensates for small losses in bolt
tension due to thermal expansion or compression set of the gaskets. Helical spring
washers employ a single-coil helical spring that flattens under load. The spring action
assists in maintaining the bolt load, while the split edges provide a locking action by
biting into the bearing surfaces. Toothed lockwashers provide a gripping action
resulting from the teeth biting into the material of the bolt head or nut, and being
deformed axially, with the application of tension from bolt torquing.

     All locking systems should be compatible. For example, using an elastic stop nut (a
nut with a deformable plastic insert) on a male thread drilled for use with a cotter pin,
may destroy the holding capability of the nut because of damage to the insert.

16.1.4 Threads

     The generally accepted standard for screw threads is the Unified thread form
identified as "UNC" for the coarse-thread series and "UNF" for the fine-thread series. In
addition to establishing diameter-pitch combinations, the Unified screw-thread system
also defines the distinct profile and identification requirements for several screw-thread
forms.

     The relationship between nominal diameter and the number of threads per inch is
referred to as the "diameter-pitch combination". There are several prominent thread
forms which cover the majority of standards intended for general engineering use.

     Coarse-thread series - This is perhaps the most widely used series of commercial
and industrial fasteners. The thread form is particularly advantageous for applications
requiring rapid assembly or disassembly, or for threading into lower-strength materials,
such as castings, soft metals, and plastics.

     Fine-thread series - For the same nominal diameter, this series incorporates more
threads per inch. The result is a larger tensile stress area than that of the same size
coarse thread, contributing to the greater strength capability of fine-thread fasteners.
These fasteners are normally used where the length of thread engagement is short, or
where a smaller lead angle is desired. Fine-thread-series fasteners are used
extensively in aerospace and in applications where coarse threads would not be

Threaded Fasteners  16-3  Revision B
suitable. Other series include the extra-fine-thread, 8-thread, 12-thread, and 16-thread
series.

     Selection of the fastener to be used in a particular application depends on several
factors:

     · Function of the fastener
     · Configuration of the joint being fastened
     · Thickness and type of materials to be joined
     · Type of loading on the fastener
     · Operating environment of the fastener

16.2 FAILURE MODES

         A fastener may experience either static loading or fatigue loading. Types of
static loading include tension, shear, bending, torsion or a combination of these loading
types. Types of fatigue loading include shock and vibration. Other common causes of
fastener failure include environmental problems, manufacturing errors, incorrect
installation and improper use of the equipment. The following sections provide a more
detailed description of fastener failure modes. A summary of failure modes, causes
and effects is included in Table 16-1.

16.2.1 Hydrogen Embrittlement

     The phenomenon of hydrogen embrittlement in threaded fasteners has been mostly
associated with high-strength (over 160 ksi) steel parts which have been furnished with
either zinc or cadmium electroplating. During the plating process, atomic hydrogen can
be trapped in or under the plating. Other sources of hydrogen can be traced to material
pickling or alkaline or acid cleaning. Unless the free hydrogen is removed, when the
fastener is used and stressed, as in a structural application, the hydrogen can attack the
grain boundaries. The result is rapid crack propagation and often-catastrophic failure of
the steel fastener.

     Two major ways to avoid the problems of hydrogen embrittlement are to (1) bake
the fasteners in a subsequent operation after plating to remove the excess hydrogen or
(2) use mechanical plating processes in lieu of electroplating. Mechanical plating is the
process of using glass beads to cold-weld a ductile metal (e.g., cadmium, zinc, etc.)
onto a metal substrate by mechanical energy. Coating thicknesses are more uniform
than when the hot-dip process is used. However, hot-dip fasteners have more
corrosion protection built-in, due to the greater coating thickness.

Threaded Fasteners  16-4  Revision B
16.2.2 Fatigue

     When a failure of a threaded fastener occurs it is invariably a catastrophic failure
occurring without warning. It is therefore important to consider the fatigue strength
properties of the threaded fastener during reliability estimates. Research has
established that rolled threads exhibit higher fatigue life than machined or ground
threads. Further, threads rolled after heat treatment show better fatigue performance
than comparable threads rolled before heat treatment. In addition, factors such as
proper bolt head design, cold work of the head-to-shank fillet, quality control of the basic
material used, and minimization of possible metallurgical defects all contribute
significantly to improved fatigue life.

     With respect to fatigue performance, it has been observed that failures normally
develop at stress levels well below the static strength of the fastener. The two main
types of joint fatigue loading are shear fatigue and tension fatigue. For shear-loaded
joints, fatigue failure normally occurs in the plate or sheet material. Some of the factors
which influence shear joint fatigue life include the applied fatigue or dynamic stresses,
hole preparation, hole clearance, amount of induced bending, and fastener preload.

16.2.3 Temperature

     Threaded fasteners will encounter both high-temperature and low-temperature
service exposures in practice. Characteristically, materials used at very low
temperatures will show an increase in tensile strength, but may sacrifice ductility.
Conversely, at elevated temperatures, tensile strength properties are usually reduced,
and above critical service temperature limits they may drop off dramatically.

16.2.4 Load and Torque

     For every fastener system, there is an optimum torque range to develop the design
clamp load. This is normally referred to as the "torque-tension relationship". Over
torquing can result in excessive bolt yielding and possible subsequent relaxation, or
even thread stripping and failure on installation. Too low an initial torque can contribute
to potential fatigue and/or joint loosening with extended service life and vibration.

     There are several factors which affect and influence the nominal torque-tension
relationship, including condition of the threads, condition and squareness of the joint,
method and equipment for torquing, installation from the nut or bolt head end, and
lubrication. Possibly the most influential factor is the lubrication (plating and/or
supplemental lubricant) on the fastener system, since the effective coefficient of friction
can alter the installation torque requirements by as much as 50 to 100 percent.

Threaded Fasteners  16-5  Revision B
                      Table 16-1 Threaded Fastener Failure Modes

      Failure Mode    Failure Cause                        Failure Effect

Male thread fracture  - Poor quality material              Eventual failure from
                      - Corrosion                          shock, vibration
Broken shank          - Fatigue

Self loosening        - Poor quality material              Immediate failure,
Fractured bolt head,  - Over-torquing                      fastener replacement
cracked nut
                      - Under-torquing                     Loose joint; joint
Thread stripping of   - Vibration                          flexure under fatigue
external or internal
thread                - Excessive preload                  Immediate failure,
                                                           fastener replacement
Loosening joint over
time                  - Production variations in           Reduced thread
                       threaded assembly                   strength, eventual
Reduced fatigue life   (bellmouthing)                      failure

Galling during        - Material tensile/shear strength
assembly or removal    variations
Surface bearing
deformation           - Radial displacement of nut
Crushed gasket        - Excessive tensile force

                      - Overloading that exceeds preload   Severity of loose joint
                      - Insufficient preload               depends on application
                      - Poor quality washers (brinelling)

                      - Bolt too tight                     Eventual assembly
                      - Bolt too loose                     failure

                      - Too fine a thread for              Inability to remove
                        application                        fastener

                      - Incorrect material combination

                      - Bolt too tight                     Fluid leakage

                      - Bolt too tight                     Fluid leakage

16.2.5 Bolt and Nut Compatibility

     Particularly where high-strength bolts are used, critical attention must be given to
specifying the correct mating nut. Inadvertent specification of a lower-strength (grade)
nut invites the possibility of nut thread stripping under high tensile loading. But more
significantly, a weaker nut will not adequately develop the full clamp load capability of a
high-strength bolt when subjected to the necessary installation torque. As a rule of

Threaded Fasteners                      16-6                      Revision B
thumb, the thickness (height) of a nut should approximate the diameter of the equivalent
mating bolt to develop the full tensile strength properties of the bolt, if the bolt and nut
materials have the same strength.

16.2.6 Vibration

     Whereas fatigue loading is presumed to be relatively high with respect to the
strength of the threaded fastener or the joint, vibration loads are relatively low, but may
be associated with various ranges of cyclic frequencies. Critical combinations of
frequency, loading, and amplitude can force a structure into resonance, often with
catastrophic results. While the overwhelming majority of operating structures are not
subjected to conditions of resonance, the vibration forces present (including random
and steady-state vibration, shock, and impact) are sometimes serious enough to
drastically affect the threaded fastener system.

     Under repeated or extensive vibration, there is a tendency for the nut to rotate or
loosen off the bolt threads. Continued vibration can actually result in the nut completely
disengaging from the bolt, with subsequent loss of the bolt from the joint. Not as
severe, but just as important, vibration loosening can reduce or completely relax the
original preload in the bolt, causing the bolt to sense increased fatigue loads with
continued exposure. What may have first started as vibration loosening may actually
end as a fatigue failure because of the complex stress mechanisms involved.

16.3 STRESS-STRENGTH MODEL DEVELOPMENT
16.3.1 Static Preload

     The most important factor that determines the preload induced in a bolt is the torque
applied to tighten the bolt. As torque is applied to the nut, the bolt stretches creating a
preload. The common method used to apply a predetermined torque is by means of a
wrench which has a dial attachment that indicates the magnitude of torque being
applied. The following empirical equation indicates the relationship between induced
preload and applied torque.

                    T = d Fi c                               (16-1)

Where:   T = Applied torque, in-lb
        d = Major bolt diameter, in.
        Fi = Initial preload, lb
         c = Torque coefficient, See Table 16-3

Threaded Fasteners              16-7             Revision B
     For most applications, the value for the torque coefficient can be approximated by
the values listed in Table 16-3. The values presented are typical because of the wide
range of values reported from coating manufacturers. The user is cautioned to consult
the manufacturer in critical applications.

     A simple bolted joint can be dangerous unless it is properly designed for the loading
and is assembled by a trained mechanic. In any fastening situation, the basic aim is to
determine as accurately as possible the least expensive fastener that, when properly
tightened, will secure a joint during product life. Properly applied assembly torque
produces the wedging action of the fastener threads that elongate the bolt to produce
tension. Tension (or preload) induced in a fastener at assembly should always be
greater than any external load the joint will experience in service. A preload ensures
optimum performance if it prevents the clamped parts from separating in service.
However, too much preload can cause damage to the bolt, stripped threads and fracture
of the material to be joined.

16.3.2 Temperature Effects of Fasteners in Clamped Joints

     If the threaded fastener is to encounter temperatures above 400 degrees F,
temperature changes must be considered in fastener joint design, in that they can act to
change the joint clamping force and/or the fastener preload. If at any time during
operation, the external loading exceeds the preload of the fastener at operating
temperature, the fastener is considered to have failed. Therefore, the preload at
ambient will need to be adjusted to compensate for the anticipated operating
temperature. Correction factors for temperature effects can be modeled as follows:

                                      E1     1           AS E1
                     Fi,operating     E2                  LE
( ) Fi,ambient                     i      i          -
        =                                    K SR                LJ -  LB              (16-2)
                                                   
                    

Where:   Fi,ambient = Preload at ambient temperature, lb

        Fi,operating = Fastener design preload at elevated operating

                         temperature, lb

               E1 = Modulus of elasticity at room temperature, lbs/in2

                         (See Table 16-2)

               E2 = Modulus of elasticity at operating temperature, lbs/in2

                         (See Table 16-2)

              KSR = Correction factor accounting for stress relaxation in the

                          fastener at elevated operating temperatures
                         (See Figure 16.2)

               As = Fastener tensile stress area, in2

Threaded Fasteners                                 16-8                    Revision B
                    =  0.7854    d  -  0.9743  2    (Reference 59)              (16-3)
                                          N 

                    d = Major bolt diameter, in

                    N = Number of threads per inch

                     LE = Effective length (as defined in Figure 16.1) of fastener, in
                    LJ = Change in length or thickness of the joint, in

                    = LG i J i TO                                               (16-4)

                    LG = Thickness of clamped joint, in

                    J = Thermal coefficient of linear expansion for joint material

                            (See Table 16-4)

                    LB = Change in grip length of the fastener, in

                       = LG i B i TO                                            (16-5)

                    B = Thermal coefficient of linear expansion for bolt

                            (See Table 16-4)

                    TO = Elevated operating temperature, oF

     Table 16-2 presents values of material moduli of elasticity vs. various temperatures.
It should be noted that Equation (16-2) above will have lower preloads at room
temperature assembly if the fastener joint is designed to be operated at a lower
temperature (lower temperatures increase the stiffness of a bolted assembly). A
reliability review must also consider the fact that the strength of most bolts decreases
with rising temperatures.

     Table 16-4 contains the values of coefficients of linear expansion for typical bolting

material, B, and joint material, J. These values are used in computing LJ and LB

of Equation (16-2). It is necessary to note that the coefficients themselves are
temperature dependent. The values in the table are based on room temperature. At
elevated temperatures, with dissimilar joint/bolt materials, if the joint material expands

more than the bolt material, the bolt will develop more stress or preload (Fi,operating) than

it was designed to experience. To the contrary, if the bolt material expands more than
the joint material at elevated operating temperatures, this will act to lessen the design
bolt preload. The correction term in Equation (16-2) is therefore subtracted from the

preload at assembly (Fi,ambient) to account for these situations.

Threaded Fasteners                  16-9                            Revision B
     At greatly elevated temperatures, many materials experience a slow increase in
length under a heavy, constant load. This phenomenon is known as creep. A bolted
joint assembly may experience a slightly different phenomenon, under which a steady
loss of stress in a heavily loaded part whose dimensions are fixed or constrained, called

stress relaxation. KSR in Equation (16-2) accounts for this time/temperature dependent

"stress relieving" factor when the bolted assembly is to be operated at extreme
temperatures. Figure 16.2 contains several plots of correction factors for various bolt
materials, derived from stress relaxation data over an elevated temperature range after
1000 hours exposure at each temperature. From the fairly constant initial ranges of
each curve in Figure 16.2, it is evident that the stress relaxation effect is of concern only
at the higher temperatures (i.e., 600oF and above).

                     Figure 16.1 Determining Effective Fastener Length (LE)

     Stress relaxation losses are not repetitive in temperature cycling situations. The
material stress value stabilizes at some lesser value after some period of time. This is
because the tendency to relax decreases as the tensile stress (the driving force) in the
bolt decreases.

16.3.3 Corrosion Considerations

     Corrosion is another potential problem that needs to be addressed in evaluating
threaded fasteners for reliability. Excessive corrosion can eventually lead to a reduction
in preload or total loss of clamping force from material deterioration. A reliability review
should verify the following:

(1) Materials in the joint assembly (bolts, nuts, structure) are identical, or as
     close together as possible in the galvanic series, minimizing electrical
     potential differences.

(2) In a situation of dissimilar metals, the larger amount of material should act
     as an anode, while the smaller amount of material behaves as the cathode.

Threaded Fasteners               16-10  Revision B
(3) The installation of a sacrificial anode has been considered that can be
     replaced from time to time such as a block of material placed in the vicinity
     of the bolted joint, where material is sacrificed in a galvanic reaction.

(4) Stresses and/or stress concentrations in the fastener and joint are
     minimized by providing generous fillets, polishing surfaces, preloading bolts
     uniformly, etc. Stress concentrations at the root of a crack will tend to
     increase the galvanic reaction between the bolt and the adjacent material,
     aiding to the growth of fatigue cracks.

(5) Various coatings have been considered that can inhibit the process of
     corrosion.

(6) Periodic replacement of the bolts, prior to failure, has been considered
     based on prediction of life expectancy.

(7) Consideration that susceptibility to stress corrosion cracking can increase
     significantly with elevated temperatures.

Figure 16.2 Stress Relaxation Factor, KSR, for Various Operating

                Temperatures & Materials (After 1000 Hours) (Ref. 60)

Threaded Fasteners  16-11  Revision B
     There is a relationship between the depth of the threads on a fastener and its
sensitivity to stress corrosion cracking. Generally, the larger diameter fasteners of a
given material will have a lower threshold stress level than small bolts. For the same
reason, fasteners with fine pitch threads are less sensitive than those with coarse
threads.

16.3.4 Dynamic Loading

     Machinery in operation is a dynamic situation. Threaded fasteners used in many
applications have a dynamic load superimposed on a much larger static preload. These
dynamic or fluctuating loads are augmented by stress concentrations and bending. In
general, the higher the dynamic loads seen by the threaded fastener, the sooner it will
fail. Whether a failure will occur or when depends on the extent and variation in
dynamic loading. The usual method of determining fatigue life of a threaded fastener is
to perform testing and establishing an S-N diagram, where S is the stress level and N is
the number of cycles of applied load. Figure 16.3 is a typical S-N diagram showing the
mean life of the fasteners under test. The curve shows that the cycle life will be very
short when applied alternating stress levels are very high. As alternating stress levels
are reduced, cycle life increases and below some stress level, the curve becomes flat
and fatigue life becomes very large. This stress level is called the endurance limit of the
fastener, and is defined as the complete reversing stress level below which fatigue life
will be infinite.

                          4

                          3.5

                          3

Stress Amplitude, S, psi  2.5

                          2

                          1.5

                                                                                              Endurance Limit

                            1

                          0.5

                          0

                               1.E+04  1.E+05  1.E+06        1.E+07  1.E+08

                                       Cycles to Failure, N

Figure 16.3 Typical S-N Diagram for Threaded Fastener

Threaded Fasteners                             16-12                                                           Revision B
     Unfortunately, endurance stress levels are usually only a small fraction of the static
yield strength of the material and the S-N curves depend on the mean tension of the
fastener in addition to the reversing stress level. The type of material used, heat
treatment used and shape of the fastener all have an effect on the endurance limit. As
a result it is not possible to use the S-N curve of the material being used as an estimate
of the fatigue life of the specific threaded fastener.

16.3.5 Determination of Base Failure Rate

     Data available from fastener manufacturers that have performed extensive testing

can be used to determine the base failure rate, F,BB. However, since this data is

somewhat specific to the conditions or environment of the test, it is often difficult to
locate data that will yield the base failure rate of a specific type of fastener, under a
particular set of loading conditions. This necessitates the development of a procedure
to estimate the base failure rate of a generic fastener, with various characteristics and
loading conditions.

     During fatigue testing of a threaded fastener, stress values become less as the data
is plotted against an increasing number of stress cycles as shown in Figure 16.3. While
the graph becomes horizontal in the case of ferrous metals and alloys after the material
has been stressed for a certain number of cycles, aluminum and other nonferrous
materials do not have a horizontal asymptote, hence limit. To develop a model to
predict fastener failures under dynamic loading, it is necessary to correlate the results of
standard material fatigue tests to the geometry and loading conditions of the fastener to
be used. It must be noted that even when the material of the test specimen and that of
the mechanical fastener are identical, there will be significant differences between the
fatigue curves for the two. Therefore, although correction factors will be presented in an
effort to compensate for this, the user is cautioned that the analytical model developed
will not yield absolutely precise results.

16.4 FAILURE RATE MODEL

     Equation (16-6) provides a determination of an expected failure rate of a threaded
fastener in hours of operation. Correction factors have been established to account for
the individual contributions by surface finish, size differential, loading, temperature, etc.

                    F = F ,B i CSZ i CL i CT i CI i CK                 (16-6)

Where: F = Failure rate of fastener, failures/million hours  Revision B

Threaded Fasteners  16-13
F,B = Base failure rate, failures/failures/million hours. See Table 16-5.

 CSZ = Multiplying factor considering the effects of size deviation from

           the S-N test specimen (See Section 16.4.1)

  CL = Multiplying factor considering the effects of different loading

           applications (See Section 16.4.2 and Table 16-6)

  CT = Elevated temperature multiplying factor (See Section 16.4.3)

  CI = Multiplying factor considering for the severity of in-service cyclic

           shock (impact) loading (See Section 16.4.4 and Table 16-7)

  CK = Stress concentration multiplying factor for fastener threads

           (See Section 16.4.5 and Table 16-8)

16.4.1 Size Multiplying Factor

     Smaller machine parts tend to exhibit greater fatigue strength than larger ones, all
other configurations and material properties being equal. Since larger surfaces have
more defects overall, the probability of failure is greater in larger parts. The size
multiplying factor is applicable to those situations where experimental fatigue life data is
available and an adjustment is to be made reflecting a different size. A correction factor
is established to account for a size differential, as well as the bending of a solid circular
material, without constant rotation (Reference 39):

For bending or torsional loading:

                    CSZ  =    0.370   d   -0.1133                         (16-7)
                                 0.3     

Where: d = Major diameter of fastener, 2 inches or less

For axial loading:

                      CSZ = 1.0                                           (16-8)
If Table 16-5 is used reflecting a standard grade of fastener, CSZ = 1.0

16.4.2 Alternate Loading Multiplying Factor

     S-N data for a specific threaded fastener may be based on loading in tension,
compression, bending torsion or shear. The base failure rate shown in Table 16-5

Threaded Fasteners                       16-14           Revision B
assumes axial loading and Table 16-6 can be used to adjust the base failure rate for the
appropriate loading.

16.4.3 Temperature Multiplying Factor

     Typical rotating beam data are acquired at room temperature. However, fasteners
are often called upon to clamp equipment at higher temperatures. Since a decline in
static and dynamic strengths, creep, and thermal expansion must all be taken into
account at higher temperatures, the following factor should be applied to the S-N test
specimen data to achieve correction (Reference 39):

     For steel operating above 160oF:

                    For TO > 160oF:  CT  =  460 + TO              (16-9)
                                               620

and:

        For TO  160oF:                   CT = 1.0

where:  TO = Operating temperature of fastener, oF

16.4.4 Cyclic Shock/Impact Loading Multiplying Factor

    A correction factor, CI, must be applied when shock loads are present. In general,

cyclic loads are less severe than applied shock loading. The factors are presented in
Table 16-7.

16.4.5 Thread Correction Multiplying Factor

     Observations of typical bolt failure pattern data from Reference 39 have revealed
that only about 15% of failures occur under the head, due to the stress riser caused by
the fillet. The risers found in the thread area accounted for the other 85%. Therefore,

Table 16-8 presents the multiplying factor, CK, for stress risers caused by the

introduction of threads. The effects of notch sensitivity and surface finish have been
incorporated.

Threaded Fasteners                   16-15            Revision B
Table 16-2. Elasticity Modulus (106 lbs/in2) as a Function of Temperature
                                          (Reference 60)

SPEC                GRADE     TEMPERATURE, degrees F

ASTM                B5        -325 -200 70     400   600 800
A193                B6
                    B7        32.9 32.3 30.9  29.0  28.0 26.1
ASTM                B8-CL 1   31.2 30.7 29.2  27.3  26.1 24.7
A307                B16       31.6 31.0 29.7  27.9  26.9 25.6
ASTM                          30.3 29.7 28.3  26.5  25.3 24.1
A320                L7        31.6 31.0 29.7  27.9  26.9 25.5
                    L43
ASTM                B8        31.4 30.8 29.5 27.7 26.7 24.2
A325                Type
ASTM                1,2,3     31.6 31.0 29.7 27.9   26.9 25.5
A354                          31.6 31.0 29.7 27.9   26.9 25.5
ASTM                B21,B22   30.3 29.7 28.3 26.5   25.3 24.1
A449                B23,B24
ASTM                GR 1,2,4  31.4 30.8 29.5 27.7   26.7 24.2
A453                GR 5,7,8
ASTM                          31.2 30.8 29.3 27.5 26.5 24.0
A490
ASTM                          31.2 30.8 29.3 27.5 26.5 24.0
A540
SAE                           30.3 29.7 28.3 26.5 25.3 24.1
J429
                              31.2 30.8 29.3 27.5 26.5 24.0

                              31.6 31.0 29.7 27.9   26.9 25.5
                              29.6 29.1 27.6 26.1   25.2 23.0
                              31.4 30.8 29.5 27.7   26.7 24.2
                              31.2 30.6 29.3 27.5   26.5 24.0

Threaded Fasteners            16-16                   Revision B
                    Table 16-3. Typical Torque Coefficients
                                      (Reference 60)

           FASTENER MATERIAL/COATING                  TORQUE COEFFICIENT, c

         Aluminum on AISI 8740 alloy steel                               0.52
         Mild or alloy steel on steel                                    0.20
         Stainless steel on mild/alloy steel                             0.30
         1" dia. A490                                                    0.18
         1" dia. A490 (rusty)*                                           0.39
         Black Oxide                                                     0.18
         Cadmium plate (dry)                                             0.20
         Cadmium plate (waxed)                                           0.19
         Galvanized A325                                                 0.46
         Galvanized, hot-dip A325                                    0.09 - 0.37
         Gold on stainless steel or beryllium copper                     0.40
         Graphitic coatings                                          0.09 - 0.28
         Machine Oil                                                     0.21
         Moly paste or grease                                            0.13
         Solid film PTFE                                                 0.12
         Zinc plate (waxed)                                              0.29
         Zinc plate (dry)                                                0.30

* Exposed outdoors for two weeks

Threaded Fasteners  16-17                                    Revision B
Table 16-4. Thermal Coefficients,  , of Linear Expansion (10-6 in/in/F)

                        Evaluated at 70F (Reference 60)

                             TEMPERATURE, degrees F

SPEC GRADE                   70   400    600   800

ASTM B5                      6.5  7.0    7.2   7.3
A193 B6
                             5.9  6.4    6.5   6.7
            B7
            B8               5.6  6.7    7.3   7.7
            B16
                             8.5  9.2    9.5   9.8

                             5.4  6.6    7.2   7.6

ASTM                         6.4  7.1    7.4   7.8
A307

ASTM                L7       5.6  6.7    7.3   7.7
A320                L43
                    L7M      6.2  7.0    7.3   7.6
ASTN                B8 CL 1
A325                         6.2  7.0    7.3   7.6
ASTM
A354                         8.5  9.2    9.5   9.8
ASTM
A449                         6.2  7.0    7.3   7.6

                             6.2  7.0    7.3   7.6

                             6.2  7.0    7.3   7.6

ASTM                         9.1  9.7    10.0  10.2
A453

ASTM 651                     6.2  7.0    7.3   7.6
A490

Threaded Fasteners                16-18              Revision B
                    Table 16-5 Fastener Base Failure Rate

Grade / Class       Diameter     Proof Load     Base Failure Rate
     SAE 1           Inches           kpsi   Failures/million hours
                                        33
                    1/4 ­ 1 1/2         55            0.260
                                        33            0.156
SAE 2               1/4 ­ 3/4           65            0.260
                                        85            0.132
SAE 2               3/4 ­ 1 1/2         74            0.101
                                        55            0.116
SAE 4               1/4 ­ 1 1/2        105            0.156
                                       120            0.082
SAE 5               1/4 - 1             33            0.072
                                        55            0.260
SAE 5               1 ­ 1 1/2           85            0.156
                                       120            0.101
SAE 5               1 1/2 - 3           85            0.072
                                        74            0.101
SAE 7               1/4 ­ 1 1/2         80            0.116
                                        75            0.107
SAE 8               1/4 ­ 1 1/2        105            0.114
                                        95            0.082
ISO 4.6             -- to 1 1/2        120            0.090
                                       120            0.072
ISO 5.8             -- to 1 1/2                       0.072

ISO 8.8             -- to 1 1/2

ISO 10.9            -- to 1 1/2

ASTM A325           1/2 - 1

ASTM A325 1 1/ 8 - 1 1/2

ASTM A354, BB 1/4 ­ 2 1/2

ASTM A354, BB 2 3/4 - 4

ASTM A354, BC 1/4 ­ 2 1/2

ASTM A354, BC 2 3/4 - 4

ASTM A354, BD 1/4 ­ 1 1/2

ASTM A490           1/2 ­ 1 1/2

Threaded Fasteners               16-19                     Revision B
                    Table 16-6. Load Multiplying Factors
                                    (Reference 39)

                    TYPE OF LOAD APPLIED         CL
                     Axial (T,ult  220 kpsi)
                     Axial (T,ult > 220 kpsi)    1.09
                     Bending                     1.00
                     Torsion and Shear           1.00
                                                 1.72

                    Table 16-7 Multiplying Factor for Impact Loading
                                             (Reference 19)

           IMPACT CATEGORY                       CI                CI

LIGHT (rotating machinery - motors,       Normal Vibration  Continuous High
turbines, centrifugal pumps)                     1.00           Vibration
MEDIUM (rotary & reciprocating motion            1.25              1.50
machines - compressors, pumps)                   1.67
HEAVY (presses for tools & dies, shears)         2.50              1.88
VERY HEAVY (hammers, rolling mills,                                2.50
crushers)
                                                                   3.75

Threaded Fasteners                        16-20                       Revision B
Table 16-8. Multiplying Factor for Threaded Elements, CK

                               (Reference 39)

                    SAE GRADE  ROLLED        CUT
                        BOLT   THREADS   THREADS

                          0-2      CK        CK
                          4-8
                                    2.2       2.8
                                    3.0       3.8

16.5 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 16, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of
threaded fasteners.

19. Hindhede, U., et al, Machine Design Fundamentals, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1983.

39. Shigley, J.E., Mischke, C.R., Mechanical Engineering Design, McGraw-Hill Book
     Co., NY, 1989.

56. Haviland, G.S., "Designing with Threaded Fasteners", Mechanical Engineering,
     Vol 105, No. 10, Oct 83.

59. Handbook H28, Nat'l Bureau of Stds, Govt Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1957.

60. Bickford, J.H., An Introduction to the Design and Behavior of Bolted Joints,
     Marcel Dekker, Inc., NY, 1990.

61. Handbook of Corrosion Data, ASM International, Metals Park, OH, 1990

62. Baumeister, T, et al, Mark's Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers

63. Thomas Couplings Applications Manual

64. Bolam, J.R., "Coupling Alignment: The Reverse Indicator Method Simplified",
     P/PM Technology, July/Aug 90

65. Dvorak, P., "Sorting Out Flexible Couplings", Machine Design, 11 Aug 88

Threaded Fasteners             16-21               Revision B
66. Robertson, R., and Smith, B., "Why Flexible Couplings Fail", Plant Engineering
      and Maintenance, Jun 89

94. Mechanical Designers' Workbook, "Fastening, Joining & Connecting", J. Shigley
     and C. Mischke, McGraw-Hill 1986

Threaded Fasteners  16-22  Revision B
                            17 CHAPTER

                      MECHANICAL COUPLINGS

17.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     17.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
        17.1.1 Rigid Shaft Couplings................................................................................ 3
        17.1.2 Flexible Shaft Couplings............................................................................ 3

     17.2 FAILURE MODES OF COUPLINGS................................................................ 4
     17.3 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR MECHANICAL COUPLING............................. 6
     17.4 UNIVERSAL JOINT ......................................................................................... 8
     17.5 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR UNIVERSAL JOINT ........................................ 9
     17.6 FAILURE RATE OF THE COUPLING HOUSING............................................ 9
     17.7 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 10

17.1 INTRODUCTION

     A mechanical system often requires an axial connection between two components
such as a motor to a pump. The connection is accomplished between the two
component shafts with use of a mechanical coupling. The coupling is designed to
transmit power (torque) from one shaft to the other, causing both to rotate in unison and
at the same RPM. Perfect alignment between the two shafts is almost impossible and
the coupling will drift from its initial position to a degree depending on the application. If
not compensated, mechanical wear of attached components will increase. Therefore,
another purpose of the mechanical coupling is to compensate for minor amounts of
misalignment and random movement between the two shafts.

     Still another common purpose of a coupling is the provision of a break-point
between the driving and driven shafts acting as a fuse if a severe torque overload
should occur. This inclusion of a safety coupling can protect a serious high-cost
equipment failure. Each of these coupling applications results in many unique designs
of mechanical couplings depending on torque requirement, rotating speed, expected
shaft misalignment, backlash limitations, vibration and other factors unique to the
application and operating environment. A typical mechanical coupling is shown in
Figure 17.1

     There is no one type of coupling that can provide the universal solution to all
coupling problems so there are many designs available for specific applications. Each
coupling design has strengths and weaknesses that must be taken into consideration

Mechanical Couplings  17-1  Revision B
for the particular application to determine its reliability for that application. The initial
selection of the coupling is related to the torque capability of the coupling in relation to
operating stress levels. Startup and shutdown torque, momentary overloads and shaft
resonance need to be evaluated to determine the maximum torque requirements. It is
important to check the overall system design to be sure that the peak torque capacity of
the power source being absorbed by the system does not exceed the normal torque
capacity of the coupling.

                                Figure 17.1 Typical mechanical Coupling

     Misalignment is an important consideration in determining the failure rate of the total
system containing a coupling. The maximum allowable misalignment is a function of
the coupling material, the percentage of torque capacity being used, and the transmitted
vibration. Misalignment may cause radial forces to be exerted on the driver and driven
components. Excessive radial forces can cause stresses on bearings, seals and other
parts to the point of premature failure.

      A coupling may be rigid or flexible; rigid couplings being used in applications where
misalignment is not a factor or where flexibility is not required. Thus, flexible couplings
are more common. Flexible couplings are designed to accommodate various types of
load conditions including rotation reversals, shock loading, load vibration, and
misalignment.

Mechanical Couplings  17-2  Revision B
17.1.1 Rigid Shaft Couplings

     Rigid couplings are used when shafts have good collinear alignment. Although
simple in design, rigid couplings are usually restricted to relatively low speed
applications where good shaft alignment and minimum shaft flexibility can be expected.
Various types of rigid shaft couplings include the following:

     (1) The clamp/compression type coupling relies on the clamping force developed
from the fasteners to connect the two shafts. Torsional forces are normally transmitted
via shaft keys.

     (2) The sleeve type coupling is generally a single piece housing that transmits
torque via shaft keys or tapered bushings. Axial positioning of the coupling is
maintained by retaining rings or threaded shaft collars.

     (3) The flange coupling mates two coupling halves together in a plane that is
perpendicular to the shaft centerline. Torque is normally transmitted between the shafts
via the bolted fasteners in the flange.

17.1.2 Flexible Shaft Couplings

     In many mechanical drive systems potential misalignment of a drive shaft, system
vibration or variable drive torque requires a flexible drive. Flexible couplings are used to
connect collinear shafts subject to one or more kinds of misalignment, while reducing
the effect of shock and impact loads that may be transferred between shafts. Flexible
couplings may employ material flexibility, mechanical flexibility or both types of flexibility.

     Material flexibility refers to those flexible couplings containing resilient components
that can accommodate shaft misalignment, as well as dampen shock and impact loads.
This type of coupling possesses torsional flexibility, often acting as a "detuning" device
by altering the vibration properties of the connected system. The flexible insert type
coupling transmits torque through an oil resistant rubber spider assembled between two
pairs of axially overlapping rigid jaws.

     Mechanical flexibility refers to flexible couplings employing rigid parts that transmit
torque without backlash or angular play (other than that due to manufacturing
tolerances and wear). These types of couplings are generally incapable of dampening
the transmittal of shock and impact loads. The bellows type coupling is used in
applications involving large amounts of shaft misalignment, combined with low radial
loading. The disc-type coupling can accommodate a smaller amount of angular
misalignment than the bellows type, but by adding additional metallic "disks", radial load
(torsional) carrying capacity can be greatly increased.

     Due to the varying ranges of performance, caution must be taken in determining
performance characteristics for the operating conditions to be encountered. Diaphragm

Mechanical Couplings             17-3  Revision B
couplings are rated for high speed operation, but accept only a small amount of
misalignment. Although elastomeric and gear type couplings can accommodate a fair
amount of angular misalignment, in general, the gear coupling is rated to accept heavier
duty (horsepower). The reliability analysis needs to consider the fact that gear
couplings require periodic maintenance in the replenishment of lubrication and seals.

17.2 FAILURE MODES OF COUPLINGS

     Table 17-2 lists various failure modes encountered when using rigid or flexible
couplings. A thorough reliability analysis can result in the elimination of many of these
failure modes by properly selecting the correct type, size and torque rating of the
coupling for the intended operational environment.

                      Table 17-2. Failure Modes of Couplings
                                        (Reference 66)

   FAILURE MODE                                FAILURE CAUSE
Worn flexing element or shaft bushings
Ruptured elastomeric flexing element,       - Excessive shaft misalignment
sheared hub pins or teeth
Fatigue of flexing element, hub pins, or    - Torsional shock overload
discs
                                            - Excessive starts and stops
Shaft bearing failure                       - Torsional vibration

Loose hubs on shaft                         - Lubricant failure
                                            - Excessive shaft misalignment
Worn gear teeth                             - Operational temperature extremes

High pitched hammering or clacking noise    - Torsional shock overload
                                            - High peak-to-peak torsional overload
Swollen, distorted, or cracked elastomeric
flexing member, severe hub corrosion        - Lubrication failure
                                            - High peak-to-peak torsional overload

                                            - Excessive shaft misalignment
                                            - Loose hubs or bolt connections
                                            - Lubricant failure

                                            - Chemical attack
                                            - Excessive heat

     The connection of the coupling to the shafts can be keyed or keyless. Also, the fit
of the coupling to the shafts can be categorized as interference or clearance. An

Mechanical Couplings  17-4                                    Revision B
interference fit, also known as a press fit, is achieved by friction after the coupling and
the shaft are joined. With the shaft ground slightly oversize and the hole in the coupling
undersized, when the two are joined, each is deformed upon being compressed so that
they are locked together by friction. Thus a keyless coupling arrangement will always
have an interference fit.

     The design principle of the clearance fit is that the torque is transmitted through the
key minimizing any sliding of the coupling on the shaft. Keyed clearance fit couplings
are most frequently used on lower-power applications. Use of a clearance fit depends
on the torque to be transmitted and operating speed. If the torque or misalignment is
excessive, the coupling hub may toggle and become loose, causing material fretting.
The interference fit with a keyed shaft is commonly used to axially locate the coupling
hub and resist forces associated with unbalance and misalignment.

     Coupling reliability is affected by the method used to mount the coupling hub on the
shafts of connected equipment. Although clearance fit connections work satisfactorily
for certain types of machinery, this practice should be avoided on any critical piece of
equipment, because the reliability of the system can be affected. The most common
cause of failure in this instance would be fretting of the coupling bore and of the shaft,
and rolling of the key within the keyway due to looseness in the connection.

     Initial alignment of the components connected by the shafts is one of the most
critical factors affecting coupling performance and reliability. This is true regardless of
the type of coupling employed. Flexible couplings are basically in-line devices which
are intended to compensate for small amounts of shaft misalignment caused by bearing
wear, foundation settling, thermal growth, etc. The more attention paid to initial
alignment, the larger the reserve margin that will exist for accomplishing the intended
purpose of the coupling. There are definite advantages to be gained from aligning
equipment to more precise values than those recommended by the manufacturer. The
primary advantage is that the reserve margin for accepting misalignment during the life
of the equipment is increased accordingly.

     Another factor to be considered, and one which is most important to satisfactory
performance, is adherence to the manufacturer's bolt torque recommendations. Loose
bolts can induce fretting corrosion, as well as hammering and pounding which will
eventually destroy the bolts and coupling discs. Chapter 16 provides the procedures to
be used in evaluating threaded fasteners for reliability.

     Proper equipment maintenance is another factor affecting the operating life of
couplings. For example, failure rate data of gear couplings indicates that at least 75%
of all coupling failures are due to lack of lubrication. A well aligned gear type coupling
requires periodic replenishment of the lubricant due to heat, oxidation, etc. There are
other failure modes that occur with the accumulation of operating time. Specifically,
shaft misalignment can develop after many cycles of operation as a result of thermal
growth caused by differences between component material thermal expansion

Mechanical Couplings  17-5  Revision B
coefficients. At elevated operating temperatures, shaft centerlines may "grow" to be
farther apart than at room temperature. In situations where a system will normally
operate at elevated temperatures, the zero misalignment condition should be set at
these elevated temperatures. In addition, total operational scenarios must be
considered. If the system has a substantial cool-down or warm-up period of operation,
then consideration must be given as to whether or not operations can be sustained
during these periods of thermal adjustment and changes in misalignment.

    Other failure modes are caused by vibration. Excessive vibration can act to bring
about material fatigue, fastener loosening, or stress corrosion cracking. After extended
operation, component wear can open clearances and augment vibration amplitudes.
Increased vibration can act to worsen shaft misalignment. Another failure mode is
caused by bearing wear. Lack of lubrication, contamination of the bearings, and wear
can deteriorate performance of a bearing over a period of time. Bearing failure can
increase vibration, which can in turn, adds to shaft operational misalignment.

17.3 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR MECHANICAL COUPLING

     An example of the type of data that coupling manufacturer's develop when testing
their coupling designs is the endurance limit as shown in Figure 17.3. As shown by the
curve as the stress level is reduced, cycle life is increased and below some stress level
the curve becomes flat and the cycles to failure becomes very large. The data is
normally design specific with speed and load limitations. The endurance limit in cycles
to failure can be converted to a base failure rate as follows:

                      CP = 1 / N                                             (17-1)

Where:  CP = Failure rate of coupling, failures/million cycles

          N = Number of cycles to failure

     In the event that manufacturer's data is not readily available, a base failure rate for
a coupling can be derived from the sum of its component parts. A typical gear coupling
unit is shown in Figure 17.4. In this example of a gear coupling unit, the failure rate is
given by:

        CP = (CP,B i CSF ) + GR + SE + H                                     (17-2)

Where:  CP = Failure rate of coupling, failures/million cycles

        CSF = Service factor multiplying factor (See Table 17-3)

        GR = Failure rate of gears, failures/million cycles (See Chapter 8)

Mechanical Couplings  17-6                                      Revision B
                                     SE = Failure rate of seals, failures/million cycles (See Chapter 3)

                                     H = Failure rate of coupling housing including hubs, failures/million

                                              cycles (See Section 17.6)

                                4

                                3.5

Coupling Stress Amplitude, psi  3

                                2.5

                                2

                                1.5

                                1                                  Endurance limit

                                0.5

                                0

                                     1.E+04  1.E+05        1.E+06  1.E+07           1.E+08

                                             Cycles to Failure, N

Figure 17.3 Stress as a Function of Cycles to Failure for a Typical Coupling

                               Figure 17.4 Gear Coupling (Reference 62)

    A typical failure rate (CP) of a coupling from data sources is 5.0 failures per million

cycles. However, the failure rate of a coupling depends more on application than

Mechanical Couplings                                 17-7                           Revision B
design or the manufacturing process. Rapid wear of the flexible member is typical of
excessive shaft misalignment. Torn rubber insert, sheared rings or ruptured elastomer
caused by high torsion impact loads or vibration are other failure considerations.

     The torque capacity of a coupling is defined as its ability to transmit a required
torque load. However, because of other factors, such as backlash, a coupling is
selected with rated torque capacity many times greater than needed. Couplings are
frequently specified in horsepower capacity (a function of torque and speed) at various
speeds. Table 17.3 below contains some service factors to modify the expected failure
rate of a coupling for the expected operating environment.

Table 17-3 Service Factors for a Mechanical Coupling

Driven Machinery      Normal Torque   High or Non-uniform
                      Characteristic           Torque
Uniform                                           1.2
Light shock                   1.1                 1.3
Medium shock                  1.2                 1.4
Heavy shock                   1.3                 1.5
                              1.4

17.4 UNIVERSAL JOINT

     A universal joint is a joint in a rigid rod that allows the rod to `bend' in any direction.
It consists of a pair of hinges located close together, oriented at 90 degrees relative to
each other connected by a cross shaft. Figure 17.5 shows a typical universal joint.

                                    Figure 17.5 Typical Universal Joint

     Universal joints are commonly used in shafts that transmit rotary motion. In
evaluating a universal joint for reliability it is important to consider not only the driver and

Mechanical Couplings  17-8            Revision B
load or the size of the shaft. Potential misalignment and vibration, operating range,
maximum torque and operating speed must also be analyzed.

17.5 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR UNIVERSAL JOINT

     The failure rate of a universal joint can be presented as a sum of the failure rates of
its individual component parts:

                      UJ = BE + SE + H + F                                      (17-3)

Where:  UJ = Failure rate of universal joint, failures/million cycles

        BE = Failure rate of bearings, failures/million cycles (See Chapter 7)

        SE = Failure rate of seals, failures/million cycles (See Chapter 3)

        H = Failure rate of coupling housing, failures/million cycles

                 (See Section 17.6)

        F = Failure rate of coupling fasteners, failures/million cycles

                 (See Chapter 16)

     The life expectancy of a joint is a function of the application requirements such as
torque, speed, and joint angle, as well as other factors. Therefore, the basic load-
speed-life-stress relationships applicable to rolling element bearings are useful in life
computations for universal joints employing similar rolling elements. These relationships
have been established in the bearing chapter of this handbook.

17.6 FAILURE RATE OF THE COUPLING HOUSING

    The housing for a mechanical coupling is a very reliable component. Defined as H,

the housing failure rate will have a greater effect on the reliability of the coupling unit
from the standpoint of how it affects other less reliable components. For instance, the
housing may have an average life expectancy of 10 years compared to the life of a seal
or bearing of only one or two years. However, the type of housing used in the coupling
assembly can have a large effect on the lifetime of the bearings and seals. This is due
to differing loads placed on the shaft by the lubricant. The failure rate of the coupling

housing (H) itself can be estimated at 0.001 failures/million cycles.

Mechanical Couplings  17-9                  Revision B
17.7 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 17, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of
mechanical couplings.

19. Hindhede, U., et al, Machine Design Fundamentals, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1983.

57. Deutschman, A.D., et al, Machine Design; Theory and Practice, MacMillan
     Publishing Co, NY, 1975

58. Parmley, R.O., Mechanical Components Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY,
      1985.

62. Baumeister, T, et al, Mark's Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers

63. Thomas Couplings Applications Manual

64. Bolam, J.R., "Coupling Alignment: The Reverse Indicator Method Simplified",
     P/PM Technology, July/Aug 90

65. Dvorak, P., "Sorting Out Flexible Couplings", Machine Design, 11 Aug 88

66. Robertson, R., and Smith, B., "Why Flexible Couplings Fail", Plant Engineering
      and Maintenance, Jun 89

67. Universal Joint & Driveshaft Design Manual, Series No. 7, Society of Automotive
      Engineers, Inc, Warrendale, Pa.

71. Dennis N. Pratt, "Investigation of Spline Coupling Wear", Report No. SY-51R-87,
      December 1987, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, Maryland

72. Randall F. Barron, "Engineering Model for Mechanical Wear", Report No. CMLD-
     CR-09-88, June 1988, Louisiana Tech University

Mechanical Couplings  17-10  Revision B
                    18 CHAPTER

                          SLIDER CRANK MECHANISMS

18.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     18.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ 1
     18.2 FAILURE MODES OF SLIDER CRANK MECHANISMS ................................ 1
     18.3 MODEL DEVELOPMENT ............................................................................... 3

        18.3.1 Bearings ................................................................................................... 4
        18.3.3 Seals/Gaskets .......................................................................................... 9
        18.3.4 Rings, Dynamic Seals .............................................................................. 9
        18.3.5 Slider Mechanism................................................................................... 10
     18.4 REFERENCES ............................................................................................. 10

18.1 INTRODUCTION

     The slider crank mechanism is usually not thought of as an independent mechanical
component but rather as an integral part of a more complex piece of equipment such as
the piston rod and related components of an internal combustion engine. Figure 18.1
shows a typical slider crank mechanism. The normal function of this particular device is
the conversion of rotational force into a linear force or vice versa.

     The typical slider crank mechanism includes bearings, rods, linkages, seals and a
sliding surface such as a cylinder wall. Wear of these parts becomes the primary failure
mechanism, the failure modes and effects being dependent upon the application. The
geometry of the design plays an important part of the reliability analysis since the
mechanical advantage and the wear pattern are greatly influenced by the positioning of
parts.

18.2 FAILURE MODES OF SLIDER CRANK MECHANISMS

     The more predominant failure modes of a slider crank mechanism can be readily
identified with frictional action on like or dissimilar materials. The component parts of a
slider crank mechanism are subject to wear in varying degrees and the normal
approach to reliability analysis is to establish the expected life of the individual parts in
the projected operating environment.

Slider Crank Mechanisms  18-1  Revision A
 Connecting rod                                Slider
Crankpin                                     Crankshaft

   Crank

                             Figure 18.1 Typical Slider Crank Mechanism

     Slider crank wear will manifest itself in several ways to cause the degradation of the
slider crank to the point of failure. This threshold of failure must be defined in terms of
jamming friction, side movement, limit of travel, alignment of parts, etc. Some of the
failure modes to be considered are included in Table 18-1.

Table 18-1. Typical Failure Modes of Slider Crank Mechanisms

                 FAILURE MODE                                FAILURE CAUSE
Linkage does not move in intended direction
Restricted linkage travel                    Bearing parts separate causing jam
Broken linkage
Linkage alignment out of tolerance           Excess load combined with bearing wear
Poor linkage response                        Mechanical seal leakage

                                             Fatigue of linkage member

                                             Bearing deformed
                                             Loss of lubricant film thickness
                                             Mechanical seal leakage

     In the slider crank mechanism shown in Figure 18.1 bearings will be located at each
of the rotating parts. Bearing wear will usually be influenced by the lubrication film
thickness that is maintained, the side load on the bearing, the contamination level, and

Slider Crank Mechanisms  18-2                            Revision A
corrosion. Chapter 7 presents an approach to evaluating bearing life for these
considerations.

     A slider crank mechanism will normally contain a mechanical seal that provides a
barrier between the moving or rotating surfaces and prevents the trapped fluid from
migrating into undesired areas. For example, in the case of an engine cylinder the rings
on the piston prevent the combustion gases from going into the lubricant and also
prevent loss of energy due to combustion gas by-pass. The O-ring and flat seals are
designed to prevent the lubricant from contaminating other part areas and also, the loss
of lubricant. Seals and gaskets are described in Chapter 3 and the models contained
therein should be used for the analysis of seal and gasket reliability.

     Crankshafts and connecting rods within the slider crank mechanism are subject to
fatigue and may crack although this failure mode is rare. Chapter 20 contains the
procedures for evaluating these components.

18.3 MODEL DEVELOPMENT

     The failure rate model for the slider crank mechanism can be expressed by the
following equation:

        SC = BE + RD + SE + RI + SM              (18-1)

Where:  SC = Total failure rate for slider crank, failures/million operations

        BE = Failure rate for bearings, failures/million operations

                  (See Section 18.3.1 and Chapter 7, Section 7.5)

        RD = Failure rate for rods/shafts, failures/million operations

                  (See Section 18.3.2 and Chapter 20, Section 20.4)

        SE = Failure rate for seals/gaskets, failures/million operations

                  (See Section 18.3.3 and Chapter 3, Section 3.2)

        RI = Failure rate for rings/dynamic seals, failures/million operations

                  (See Section 18.3.4 and Chapter 3, Section 3.3)

        SM = Failure rate for slider mechanism, failures/million operations

                  (See Section 18.3.5 and Chapter 9, Section 9.3)

     Failure rates are determined for the individual parts comprising the slider crank
mechanism. Then, a total failure rate of the slider crank mechanism is determined
using Equation (18-1).

Slider Crank Mechanisms  18-3        Revision A
18.3.1 Bearings

     One of the predominant failure modes of a slider crank mechanism is caused by a
malfunctioning bearing surface. Both roller and sliding bearings can be included in a
slider crank design. Failure rate equations for roller/ball bearings are included in
Chapter 7.

     Typical sliding bearings are shown in Figure 18.2. The sliding bearing is usually
comprised of three elements including a fixed member, moving member, and the
lubricant film separating the fixed and moving members. An example sliding bearing is
shown in Figure 18.3. The sliding bearing may be characterized as a shaft rotating
within a sleeve. Sliding bearings can be classified by material, load direction, lubrication
method, and configuration. Sliding bearings are well suited for large loads encountered
in slider crank mechanisms. Although sliding bearings may have less running friction
than rolling bearings, their starting friction is much higher. Rolling bearings are also
easier to lubricate during service life. Sliding bearings are well suited to slider crank
mechanisms in low speed applications where shock and vibration may occur.

                         Figure 18.2 Sliding Bearing Classifications
                                             (Reference 19)

     In a hydrostatic bearing the pressure is always present at the predetermined level
supplied by an external pump which forces lubricant into the system. Hydrodynamic
sliding bearings are characterized by the load being carried by a lubrication film being

Slider Crank Mechanisms  18-4                                         Revision A
generated by shaft rotation. Hydrodynamic bearings are more prone to initial wear than
hydrostatic bearings because lubrication does not occur until there is rotation of the
shaft. The friction at start-up is largely due to a direct contact between the journal and
sleeve. The life of the bearing then is limited due to wear at start-up and stopping.

     The reliability of the sliding crank mechanism will, of course, be affected by the
lubricant being used. All liquids provide lubrication but some do better jobs in particular
applications. Dry lubricants, for example, will adhere very well to the bearing surfaces
but tend to wear quite rapidly and their capacity to minimize friction is only fair. The
concept of lubricant viscosity is illustrated in Figure 18.3.

        Figure 18.3 Sliding Bearing Lubricant Viscosity
                                (Reference 19)

     In this figure, a film of lubricant adheres to the stationary plate and supports a

moving plate. In order to move the upper plate to the right at a constant velocity V, it is
necessary to exert some constant force F. Thus a shear stress is applied at the wetted

surface of the moving plate equal to (Reference 19):

                         =F                                                       (18-2)

                              A

Where:   = Shear stress, lbs/in2

        F = Applied Force, lb
        A = Area of plate surface in contact with lubricant, in2

The rate of shearing strain R' is defined by the following equation:

Slider Crank Mechanisms          18-5                                 Revision A
                         R' = V                                     (18-3)
                               h

Where:                   V = Velocity of moving member
                         h = Lubricant film thickness

     The ratio of shearing stress to rate of shearing strain is called the dynamic viscosity,

 (Reference 19):

                          =  = Fh                                   (18-4)

                                R' AV

     Three types of lubrication occur in practice. They differ in the degree to which the
lubrication is carrying the load. A full film lubrication physically separates the shaft and
bearing surfaces by a relatively thick lubricant film of about 15 microns. This film
prevents any metal-to-metal contact at the operating conditions. The coefficient of
friction will be low, usually not above about 0.005. Full film operation implies minimum
power losses and maximum life expectancy of the parts.

     Complete boundary lubrication means that the bearing and shaft surfaces are being
rubbed together with only a very thin lubricant film adhering to each surface and
preventing direct contact. The coefficient of friction is high, in the range of 0.1.

     Mixed film lubrication means that there is both boundary and full film lubrication.
Part of the load is carried by small pools of self-pressurized lubricant. Other areas of
the surfaces are rubbing with only a thin film of lubricant separating the peaks. A typical
friction coefficient for this type of lubrication is 0.02.

     Figure 18.4 shows the coefficient of friction plotted against a bearing characteristic

number n/P. The three operating variables in this bearing characteristic number are

the lubricant's viscosity, shaft speed, and unit bearing load:

                          = n                                       (18-5)

                                P

Where    = Bearing characteristic number
         = Lubrication viscosity, lb-min/in2
        n = Shaft speed, revolutions/sec
        P = Unit bearing load, lbs/in2

Slider Crank Mechanisms  18-6                           Revision A
     The unit bearing load is defined as the ratio of the bearing's load to its projected
area:

                               W              (18-6)
                         P=

                              DL

Where:  W = Bearing load, lb
        D = Bearing diameter, in
        L = Bearing length, in

           Figure 18.4 Variation of Friction Coefficient with the n/P factor

                                                    (Reference 19)

     This bearing characteristic number provides a method of determining any potential
problem with lubricant film. Any low viscosity, low shaft speed, or high unit bearing load

implies a low value for n/P. Conversely, the higher n/P, the easier it is to establish a

full-load-supporting film.

Slider Crank Mechanisms  18-7     Revision A
    As shown in Figure 18.4, for the largest values of n/P, there is fluid-film, or

hydrodynamic lubrication regime. In this regime of operation the coefficient of friction

attains a minimum of about 0.001. Operating with a slightly greater n/P value will

assure an adequately thick film and a margin of safety with a somewhat greater power

loss. The lowest values of n/P correspond to the type of complete boundary

lubrication. The friction coefficient remains constant throughout this lubrication regime;
its actual value depends on the character of the surfaces and the lubricant. The mid-

regime is that of mixed-film lubrication. In this regime a decrease in n/P is

accompanied by a sharp increase in friction coefficient.

     Many bearings utilized in mechanical devices are considered light service and can
operate successfully in the mixed-film or boundary lubrication regimes. Typical office
equipment and appliances with latching mechanisms contain self-lubricated bearings.
Manufacturers of bearings for light service usually base bearing selection on the PV
factor, the product of unit bearing load P and rubbing velocity V. This factor indicates
what bearing temperature will be reached and what rate of wear can be expected.
Temperature rise and wear rate are maintained within reasonable limits by controlling
the PV factor.

     The unit bearing load P, already defined by Equation (18-6) is the ratio of the
bearing's load to its projected area. The rubbing velocity V must be calculated
differently for oscillating shaft motion than for continuous rotation. For continuous
rotation the rubbing speed is (Reference 19):

                         V = 5 D n                              (18-7)

Where:  V = Rubbing velocity, ft/min
        D = Bearing diameter, in

        n = Shaft speed, revolutions/sec

     However, if the shaft is oscillating relative to the bearing, the design value for V is
based on the average rubbing speed.

                         V = D f                                (18-8)

                                  72

Where:   = Total angle traveled per cycle, degrees
        f = Frequency of oscillation, cycles/sec

     The use of sleeve or journal bearings in severe service requires a full bearing or a
thick lubrication film to support the load. While an external pump may be used to supply

Slider Crank Mechanisms  18-8                       Revision A
a lubricant under pressure to the bearing's feed hole, within the bearing itself it is the
shaft that acts as a pump and pumps the oil adhering to it into the wedge-shaped oil film
that supports the load. With the shaft stationary, the shaft simply rests on the bottom of
the bearing. But at start-up the shaft begins to roll up the bearing wall. As it climbs, it
also begins to pump oil between itself and the bearing. As this oil is pumped, the shaft
lifts off the bearing surface and moves in the direction of rotation. At operating speed,
the shaft has developed a wedge-shaped film between itself and the bearing that
supports the shaft and its load. The radial displacement of the shaft's center from the
bearing's center is the eccentricity. The pressure distribution in the oil film achieved
depends on factors such as shaft speed, load, lubricant viscosity, bearing clearance,
and length-to-diameter ratio.

     The failure rate of a bearing is obtained using the equations contained in Chapter 7.
The information obtained from this section can be used in conjunction with the
procedures in Chapter 7 to estimate the failure rate of the bearing.

18.3.2 Rods/Shafts

     The reliability of the rod or shaft is generally very high when compared to the
components in the slider crank mechanism. Generally, the life expectancy will be at
least three times that of the bearing. The possibility that the rod or shaft will fracture
can best be determined using finite element techniques. The effects of the rod or shaft
breakage on adjacent components are of greater importance than the reliability of the
rod or shaft itself.

    The failure rate of a rod, RD, can be estimated at 0.001 failures/million hours for

fracture. If deemed critical, procedures for determining the base failure rate and the
multiplying factors for a rod or shaft can be found in Chapter 20.

18.3.3 Seals/Gaskets

     The failure rate of a seal or gasket is determined by the ability of the seal to restrict
the flow of fluid from one region to another for the intended life in the prescribed
operating environment. Section 3.2 of Chapter 3 contains procedures and equations for

determining SE in Equation (18-1).

18.3.4 Rings, Dynamic Seals

     The sealing surface of rings and other dynamic seals are perpendicular to the shaft
with contact between primary and secondary rings to achieve a dynamic seal at various
speeds, pressures and temperatures. The procedures contained in Chapter 3 can be

used to determine RI in equation (18-1), the failure rate for rings.

Slider Crank Mechanisms      18-9  Revision A
18.3.5 Slider Mechanism

     The wear life of the sliding surface area depends on the correlation of wear of the
two surfaces involved with the material strength and the stress imposed on the slider
mechanism. From a time standpoint, wear of the two surfaces will occur in two phases.
The first or constant wear phase is characterized by the shearing of asperities due to
sliding action. During this period the wear rate is practically linear as a function of the
number of mechanical cycles and the wear depth at the end of the constant wear phase
is one half the original surface finish. During the second or severe wear phase, wear
debris becomes trapped between the two sliding surfaces and gouging of the surfaces
takes place. The wear rate begins to increase very rapidly and failure of the slider
mechanism is imminent. Chapter 9, Section 9.3 contains the procedure and equations
to determine the number of cycles at which point the slider crank mechanism is
determined to have failed due to wear.

18.4 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 18, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of a
slider crank mechanism.

19. Hindhede, U., et al, Machine Design Fundamentals, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1983.

57. Deutschman, A.D., et al, Machine Design; Theory and Practice, MacMillan
     Publishing Co, NY, 1975

58. Parmley, R.O., Mechanical Components Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY,
      1985.

62. Baumeister, T, et al, Mark's Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers

72. Randall F. Barron, "Engineering Model for Mechanical Wear", Report No. CMLD-
      CR-09-88, June 1988, Louisiana Tech University

Slider Crank Mechanisms  18-10  Revision A
                               19 CHAPTER

                         SENSORS AND TRANSDUCERS

19.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     19.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
     19.2 TYPES OF SENSORS..................................................................................... 2

        19.2.1 Thermal Sensors ....................................................................................... 3
        19.2.2 Force Sensors ........................................................................................... 3
        19.2.3 Positional Sensors..................................................................................... 4
        19.2.4 Fluid Sensors ............................................................................................ 5
        19.2.5 Optical Sensors ......................................................................................... 6
        19.2.6 Motion Sensors ......................................................................................... 6
        19.2.7 Presence Sensors ..................................................................................... 7
        19.2.8 Environmental Sensors ............................................................................. 8
     19.3 FAILURE MODES OF SENSORS ................................................................... 9
     19.4 SENSOR FAILURE RATE MODEL DEVELOPMENT ................................... 12
     19.5 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 18

19.1 INTRODUCTION

     A sensor is a hardware device that measures a physical quantity and produces a
signal which can be read by an observer or by an instrument. For example, a
thermocouple converts temperature to an output voltage, which can be read by a
voltmeter. For accuracy, all sensors are calibrated against known standards. A
transducer is a device that is actuated by power from one system and supplies power
usually in another form to a second system. For example, a loudspeaker is a
transducer that transforms electrical signals into sound energy. A standard definition for
a sensor or transducer does not exist and the words sensor and transducer are used
synonymously, specific names being given depending on the application. Also, suffixed
derivatives ending in -meter such as accelerometer, flowmeter and tachometer are
used. For convenience, the basic sensor will be used in this chapter to describe these
units.

     Analog sensors produce a continuous output signal or voltage, which is generally
proportional to the quantity being measured. Physical quantities such as temperature,
velocity, pressure and displacement are all analog quantities, as they tend to be
continuous in nature. For example, the temperature of a liquid can be measured using a
thermometer or thermocouple, which continuously responds to temperature changes as

Sensors and Transducers  19-1  Revision B
the liquid is heated up or cooled down. Digital sensors produce a discrete output signal
or voltage that is a digital representation of the quantity being measured. Digital sensors
produce a discrete (non-continuous) value, which may be outputted as a single bit or a
combination of the bits to produce a single byte output.

     One of the important newer applications of sensors to system reliability is
prognostics and diagnostics. A prognostic/diagnostic system uses sensors to monitor
operational and environmental conditions and translates any changes to component
remaining life using the equations in this Handbook embedded in the
prognostic/diagnostic processor. As preestablished threshold values are exceeded, the
embedded reliability models calculate component overstress and cumulative damage
and provide maintenance personnel of impending malfunctions and the next best
maintenance action to be performed.

19.2 TYPES OF SENSORS

     In almost every product for commercial and military application, the number of
sensors and transducers continues to increase. The application of "smart sensors" with
digital communication techniques and resulting improved accuracy and self-healing
sensor networks has created an ever-increasing application of sensor technology.
Table 19-1 is a partial listing of the applications for sensors and transducers.

                         Table 19-1. Typical Sensor Applications

     Sensor      Section                      Typical Sensor/Transducer
Classification  Reference
                 19.2.1    Thermostat, thermister, thermocouple, thermopile
Thermal          19.2.2    Mechanical force, strain gauge, torque
Force            19.2.3    Potentiometer, LVDT, rotary encoder
Positional       19.2.4    Pressure, flow, viscometer
Fluid                      Photodiode, phototransistor, photodetector, infrared,
                           fiberoptic
Optical         19.2.5     Displacement, velocity, acceleration, vibration, shock
                           Proximity
Motion          19.2.6     Temperature, altitude, humidity, smoke
Presence        19.2.7
Environmental   19.2.8

Sensors and Transducers    19-2                                   Revision B
19.2.1 Thermal Sensors

     Thermal sensors vary from simple ON/OFF thermostatic devices that control a
domestic hot water system to highly sensitive semiconductor types that control complex
processing facilities. Temperature sensors measure the amount of heat energy within
an object and detect any physical change to that temperature. There are many different
types of thermal sensors and all have different characteristics depending upon their
actual application. Typical thermal sensors include the following:

    - Resistance Temperature Detector: Same as a power resistor

    - Thermistor: A thermistor is a passive resistive device that changes its physical
resistance with temperature producing a measurable voltage depending on the current
through the device. A thermistor is generally made from ceramic type semiconductor
materials such as oxides of nickel, manganese or cobalt coated in glass. Thermistors
are generally connected in series with a suitable biasing resistor to form a potential
divider network and the choice of resistor gives a voltage output at some pre-
determined temperature point or value.

     - Thermocouple: A thermocouple converts thermal energy into electrical energy. It
consists of two junctions of dissimilar metals, such as copper and constantan that are
welded or crimped together. A thermocouple is created whenever two dissimilar metals
touch and the contact point produces a small thermoelectric voltage as a function of
temperature (Seebeck voltage). The thermocouple is a commonly used temperature
sensor because of its simplicity, small size, ease of application and speed of response
to changes. A thermopile is composed of thermocouples connected in series.

19.2.2 Force Sensors

     Force sensors are used to obtain an accurate determination of pulling and/or
pressing forces. The force sensor creates an electrical signal which corresponds to the
force measurement to be used for further evaluation or process control. Force sensors
are commonly used in automotive vehicle assemblies such as brakes, suspension units
and air-bag systems.

     A force sensor generally measures the applied force from the proportional
deformation of a spring element; the larger the force, the more this element deforms.
Many force sensors employ the piezoelectric principle exhibited by quartz. Under load,
quartz crystals produce an electric charge proportional to the mechanical load applied;
the higher the load, the higher the charge. Thus, in piezoelectric force sensors, quartz
serves as both the spring element and the measurement transducer.

     A strain gauge is a device used to measure the strain of an object. The strain
gauge is the fundamental sensing element for many types of sensors, including
pressure sensors, load cells, torque sensors and position sensors. The majority of strain

Sensors and Transducers  19-3  Revision B
gauges are foil types. They consist of a pattern of resistive foil which is mounted on a
backing material and as the foil is subjected to stress, the resistance of the foil changes.
This results in a signal output, related to the stress value.

     Commonly, torque transducers use strain gauges applied to a rotating shaft or axle.
The strain gauge bridge requires voltage and a torque transducer is required to receive
the signal from the rotating shaft. This can be accomplished using slip rings, rotary
transformers or wireless telemetry.

19.2.3 Positional Sensors

     A positional sensor is one that permits a linear or angular position measurement. It
can either be an absolute positional sensor or a relative one (displacement sensor).

     A conventional potentiometer is an analog device that can be used as a positional
sensor to vary, or control, the amount of current that flows through an electronic circuit.
The potentiometer can be either angular (rotational) or linear (slider type) in its
movement providing an electrical signal output that has a proportional relationship
between the actual wiper position and its resistance change. A digital potentiometer
consists of resistor arrays, switches, logic gates, multiplexers, and data converters.
Digital potentiometers have excellent setability, better resolution, and lower noise levels
than conventional potentiometers. They are more stable over time and their resistance
drifts minimally. They are more reliable and exhibit a lower temperature coefficient of
resistance than analog potentiometers.

     The Linear Variable Differential Transformer (LVDT) is an inductive type positional
device that works on the same principle as an AC transformer. It is a very accurate
device for measuring linear distances with an output proportional to the position of its
moveable core. It basically consists of three coils wound on a hollow tube, one forming
the primary coil and the other two coils forming identical secondary coils 180o out of
phase from either side of the primary coil. An armature connected to the object being
measured slides up and down inside the tube. The AC excitation voltage applied to the
primary winding induces an EMF signal into the two secondary windings providing an
amplitude that is a linear function of core displacement.

     The LVDT must be calibrated for the particular application. Any mechanical change
in the application such as a part that has been moved or replaced requires recalibration.
It is important that the calibration of an LVDT take place in contact with the part it is to
measure.

     Rotary Encoders resemble potentiometers but are non-contact optical devices used
for converting the angular position of a rotating shaft into an analog or digital data code.
Rotary encoders utilize light from an LED or infrared light source that is passed through
a rotating high-resolution encoded disk containing the required code patterns.

Sensors and Transducers  19-4  Revision B
Photodetectors scan the disk as it rotates and an electronic circuit processes the
information into a digital form as a stream of binary output pulses that are fed to
counters or controllers which determine the actual angular position of the rotating shaft.

19.2.4 Fluid Sensors

     A fluid pressure sensor detects a pressure difference between a detecting pressure
and reference pressure and converts the difference into an electric signal. Pressure
sensors are used to measure pressures of gases or liquids. Pressure measurements
typically are made as absolute, gauge, or differential measurements. Absolute pressure
sensors measure a pressure relative to a vacuum, gauge sensors measure a pressure
relative to atmospheric pressure, and differential sensors measure a pressure difference
between two inputs.

     Generally, a pressure sensor for sensing a gas or liquid pressure has a diaphragm
that acts as a pressure sensing element and is configured such that deflection (pressure
deformation) of a diaphragm under a fluid pressure applied through a pressure port is
converted to an electrical signal, thereby enabling the fluid pressure to be measured.

     A fluid flow sensor is a device for sensing the rate of fluid flow. Typically a flow
sensor is the sensing element used in a flowmeter or datalogging device to record the
flow of fluids. There are various kinds of flow sensors and flowmeters including some
that have a vane that is pushed by the fluid and can drive a rotary potentiometer or
similar device. Other flow sensors are based on sensors which measure the transfer of
heat caused by the moving medium.

     The flow sensor can normally measure velocity, flow rate or totalized flow. Flow
sensors are sometimes related to sensors called velocimeters that measure speed of
fluids flowing through them. The flow sensor technology can be based on such things as
light, heat, electromagnetic properties, ultrasonic and many other technologies in a wide
spectrum. A flow sensor can work by direct measurement or inferential measurement.
Several types of flow sensors are non-mechanical and normally work by the inferential
method. As is true for all sensors, accuracy of a fluid sensor measurement requires a
calibration applicable to the sensor function.

     A viscometer is an instrument used to measure the viscosity of a fluid. Viscometers
only measure one flow condition. In general, either the fluid remains stationary and an
object moves through it, or the object is stationary and the fluid moves past it. The drag
caused by relative motion of the fluid and a surface is a measure of the viscosity.

Sensors and Transducers  19-5  Revision B
19.2.5 Optical Sensors

     Optical sensors are passive devices that convert radiant light energy into an
electrical signal output. The most common type of photoconductive device is the
photoresistor which changes its electrical resistance in response to changes in the light
intensity. Photojunction devices are PN-Junction light sensors or detectors made from
silicon semiconductors that can detect both visible light and infrared light levels. This
class of photoelectric light sensors includes the photodiode and the phototransistor.
Phototransistor light sensors operate the same as photodiodes except that they can
provide current gain and are much more sensitive than the photodiode.

     Photodetectors, also known as proximity sensors, are used to determine if a moving
object enters the range of a sensor. The most commonly found photodetector is the
"electric eye". This type of sensor works by projecting a beam of light from a transmitter
to a receiver across a specific distance. As long as the beam of light maintains a
connection with the receiver, the circuit remains closed. If an object passes through the
beam of light, the continuity of the circuit is lost, and the circuit opens. An example of
this type of sensor is a garage door opener safety sensor that will halt the closing of the
door if an object breaks the beam.

     Active infrared sensors project a beam of light in the infrared spectrum and receive
the returning reflection from objects in the sensor's range. Infrared sensors can be used
as proximity sensors, such as in automatic doors. Passive infrared sensors are used to
measure the radiation of heat within its range. Examples of passive infrared sensors
include "heat-seeking" missile guidance systems and infrared thermography systems.

     Fiberoptic sensors can be used to measure a wide range of physical phenomena,
depending on the configuration of the sensor. Optical fibers can be coated with
materials that respond to changes in strain, temperature, or humidity. Optical gratings
can be etched into the fiber at specific intervals to reflect specific frequencies of light. As
the fiber is strained, the distances between the gratings change, allowing the physical
strain to be measured.

19.2.6 Motion Sensors

     Motion sensors are designed to measure the rate of change of position, location, or
displacement of an object that is occurring. If the position of an object is changing as a
function of time the first derivative gives the speed of the object and if the speed of the
object is also changing, then the first derivative of the speed gives the acceleration.

     Displacement sensors measure the distance an object moves and they can also be
used to measure object height and width. Optical and magnetic displacement sensors
are used to detect the amount of a linear displacement. Linear and angular
displacement sensors are used for high-precision machining and measuring, for

Sensors and Transducers  19-6  Revision B
manufacturing and testing components with very tight dimensional tolerances.
Magnetic displacement sensors consist of one or more magnets producing an induction
field and typically measure linear or rotational displacement providing an output
proportional to absolute linear or rotary position displacement of the elements.

     Velocity sensors measure the linear velocity of an object using either contact or
non-contact techniques. In cable-extension linear velocity sensors, the moving object is
attached to a cable, which is typically connected to a potentiometer. As the object
moves, the potentiometer's resistance value changes. Magnetic induction sensors are
non-contact linear velocity sensors that use an induced current from a magnetic field to
measure the linear velocity. Microwave sensors use microwave technology to
determine speed, whereas fiber optic sensors use fiber optics or laser technology to
determine speed. Piezoelectric linear velocity sensors utilize a piezoelectric material
that is compressed generating a charge that is measured by a charge amplifier. Often,
piezoelectric sensors are used in vibration velocity measurement applications.

     The simplest acceleration type measures mass motion by attaching the spring mass
to the wiper arm of a potentiometer. In this manner, the mass position is conveyed as a
changing resistance. The Linear Variable Differential Transformer (LVDT) takes
advantage of the natural linear displacement to measure mass displacement. In these
instruments, the LVDT core itself is the seismic mass. Displacements of the core are
converted directly into a linearly proportional voltage. These accelerometers generally
have a natural frequency less than 80 Hz and are commonly used for steady-state and
low-frequency vibration.

     Vibration sensors are sensors for measuring, displaying and analyzing linear
velocity, displacement and proximity, or acceleration. They can be used on a stand-
alone basis, or in conjunction with a data acquisition system. Vibration sensors are
available in many forms. They can be raw sensing elements, packaged transducers, or
as a sensor system or instrument, incorporating features such as local or remote
display, and data recording. The primary elements of importance in shock
measurements are that the device has a natural frequency that is greater than 1 kHz
and a range typically greater than 500 g. The primary accelerometer that can satisfy
these requirements is the piezoelectric type.

19.2.7 Presence Sensors

    A proximity sensor is a sensor able to detect the presence of nearby objects without
any physical contact. A proximity sensor often emits an electromagnetic or electrostatic
field, or a beam of electromagnetic radiation (infrared, for instance), and looks for
changes in the field or return signal. The object being sensed is often referred to as the
proximity sensor's target. Different proximity sensor targets demand different sensors.
For example, a capacitive or photoelectric sensor might be suitable for a plastic target
while an inductive proximity sensor requires a metal target.

Sensors and Transducers  19-7  Revision B
    Proximity sensors can have a high reliability and long functional life because of the
absence of mechanical parts and lack of physical contact between sensor and the
sensed object. The maximum distance that this sensor can detect is defined as its
"nominal range". Some sensors have adjustments of the nominal range or means to
report a graduated detection distance. Proximity sensors are also used in machine
vibration monitoring to measure the variation in distance between a shaft and its support
bearing. This is common in large steam turbines, compressors, and motors that use
sleeve-type bearings.

     A proximity sensor is divided in two halves and if the two halves move away from
each other, then a signal is activated. An example application of a proximity sensor is
for window security. When the window opens an alarm is activated.

19.2.8 Environmental Sensors

     Environmental sensors include those used to measure temperature, humidity, wind
speed, barometric pressure, etc. They are often connected in a network. Temperature
sensors are discussed in Section 19.2.1. An analog humidity sensor gauges the
humidity of the air relatively using a capacitor-based system. The sensor is made out of
a film usually made of either glass or ceramics. The insulator material which absorbs
the water is made out of a polymer which takes in and releases water based on the
relative humidity of the given area. This changes the level of charge in the capacitor of
the electrical circuit.

     A digital humidity sensor works via two micro sensors that are calibrated to the
relative humidity of the given area. These are then converted into the digital format with
an analog to digital conversion.

     Most smoke detectors work either by optical detection (photoelectric) or by physical
process (ionization). They may also use both detection methods to increase sensitivity
to smoke. In a photoelectric device, smoke can block a light beam reducing the light
reaching a photocell used to set off an alarm. Ionization detectors have an ionization
chamber and a source of ionizing radiation. Released radiation particles ionize the
oxygen and nitrogen atoms in the chamber. These positively-charged atoms are
attracted to the negative plate in the chamber and the electrons are attracted to the
positive plate, generating a small, continuous electric current. When smoke enters the
ionization chamber, the smoke particles attach to the ions and neutralize them, so they
do not reach the plate. The drop in current between the plates triggers the alarm.

Sensors and Transducers  19-8  Revision B
19.3 FAILURE MODES OF SENSORS

      Typical failure modes for individual sensors are shown in Table 19-2. These
example failure modes must be modified for the particular application. A design
analysis of equipment reliability (See Chapter 24) performed on the sensor assembly
will help focus on the modifying factors to be used on published failure rates. Failure
modes need to be addressed for the specific sensor network being analyzed. Typical
subsystems of a sensor network include:

     - Data processing subsystem ­ provide and process the measured quantities for
        further real-time use by the human and communication interfaces and/or at the
        electrical output subsystem.

     - Sensor subsystem ­ convert the physical or chemical quantities into conditioned
        electrical signals for use in the data processing unit.

     - Human interface ­ read the information on a display and enter request for data

     - Communications interface ­ connect the instrument to external systems

     - Electrical output subsystem ­ convert the digital information into one or more
        analog signals

     - Power supply unit ­ supply power to the other smart sensor subsystems.

     Reliability is defined differently in real time applications than for delay tolerant
applications. In real time applications reliability is dependent upon the arrival time of
sensor data and a delay in data processing may be a sensitive failure mode. In a delay
tolerant configuration data loss is the factor determining reliability. There are other
significant differences in failure modes when evaluating a sensor network for reliability.
Additional failure modes to be considered include information overload, timing errors,
node interference, power depletion and digitization errors. Table 19-3 lists some typical
failure modes of sensor network applications.

     Timing in conventional sensors is not normally an issue since the sensor
continuously measures the parameter and presents a resulting 4-20mA signal. In a
sensor network architecture based on interrupts, the sensor might receive many
interrupts of high priority and might subsequently fail to attend to the tasks of lower
priority. Another potential problem with a sensor network is data integrity. With
conventional sensors, parameters are set using fixed components such as resistors,
and are therefore highly insensitive to external influences. In the case of a sensor
network, the sensor may lose the parameter settings stored in memory during a power
failure. Failure modes of the communications link in sensor networks include
information overload of the communications interface causing events happening

Sensors and Transducers  19-9  Revision B
simultaneously to be communicated sequentially, thus confusing the operator when
deciding what caused a disturbance.

         Table 19-2. Typical Failure Modes of Individual Sensors

      FAILURE MODES      FAILURE CAUSES                  FAILURE EFFECT

Incorrect signal from sensor - Reduced signal level      Potential processing error
                         - Impedance mismatch
element

                         - A/D conversion error

Loss of signal from sensor - Chip failure                Loss of signal to processor

element                  - Corroded sensor

Complete loss of signal in - Broken wire                 Loss of signal to processor

transmission line        - Fiber optic, RF interruption

Signal error in transmission - Power line interference   Potential processing error

line                     - Contaminants in fluid system

Incorrect signal in      - Error in algorithm            Processing error
computation device

Power supply loss of     - Power supply malfunction Loss of signal to processor
voltage

Improper response to     - Incorrect interpretation      Potential system malfunction
information recipient    - System malfunction
                         - Error in algorithm

Calibration error        - Software error                Potential system malfunction
                         - Error in algorithm

Battery energy depletion - Battery malfunction           Loss of signal to processor

Sensors and Transducers                    19-10                           Revision B
Table 19-3. Typical Failure Modes of Sensor Networks

    FAILURE MODES                  FAILURE CAUSES             FAILURE EFFECT
                              Power Supply malfunction   Loss of signal history,
Loss of voltage to all        Wire failure               calibration and settings
components                                               information
                                                         Loss or incorrect measurement
Loss of voltage to sensor                                of input signal
subsystem/ADC                                            Loss of signal history,
                                                         calibration and settings
Loss of voltage to processor Wire failure                information
                                                         Loss of or incorrect output or
Loss of voltage to            Wire failure               settings
transceiver                                              No display of data, setting of
                                                         parameters not possible
Loss of voltage to human      Wire failure               Incorrect output
interface
                                                         Incorrect output
Defect in D/A conversion Hardware error
                                                         Node failure
Incorrect signal from sensor  Defect in A/D conversion,  Incorrect output
                              software error
                                                         Incorrect output
Loss of signal from sensor Sensor failure
                                                         Loss of or incorrect output
Timing error from sensor Software error
                                                         Incorrect output
Conditioning of data from     Software error
sensor is incorrect                                      Incorrect output

Corrupted signals to data     Information overload,      Incorrect output, incorrect
processing or external        software error             calibration
system                                                   Incorrect action by controller

Error in signal processing Software error                Incorrect output

Error in calibration          Failure of communications  Incorrect output
                              interface, software error
                                                                                     Revision B
Error in data storage         Hardware/software error

Incorrect display of data     Human error
                              Human/software error
Incorrect setting of          Hardware error
parameters

Loss of clock, wrong or
changing frequency

Sensors and Transducers                     19-11
19.4 SENSOR FAILURE RATE MODEL DEVELOPMENT

    A typical sensor arrangement is shown in Figure 19.1. Here a differential
transformer is used in conjunction with a spring to measure weight. The sensing
element is the spring which is compressed when the weight is applied against the
sensor changing the position of the central core of the differential transformer. The
transformer converts the position of the core into an electrical signal with the magnitude
proportional to the applied weight.

     The failure rate of the sensor in Figure 19.1 is essentially determined by the failure
rates of the compression spring and the transformer. The failure rate of the spring can
be determined by using the procedures in Chapter 4. MIL-HDBK-217 contains
procedures for determining the failure rate of the transformer (Reference 28).

     Other typical sensors for mechanical flow sensing are shown in Figure 19.2. In
Figure 19.2(a), a spring loaded hinged vane is pushed open as fluid flows through the
sensor; and in Figure 19.2(b), the fluid pushes against a spring restrained plug. Again
the failure rates of the individual parts are determined using procedures in the
applicable chapters of this handbook for cylindrical wear, springs, etc.

                           Figure 19.1 Typical Positioning Sensor Unit

     It is important to realize that determining the failure rate of a sensor is more involved
than combining failure rates of the individual parts. As shown in Figure 19.3, sensors

Sensors and Transducers  19-12  Revision B
are used as part of a larger sensing/monitoring/detection system and the reliability of
the total system is sensitive to its defined requirements. Accuracy, repeatability,
sensitivity, drift, and other performance requirements are an important part of the failure
rate estimate. Redundant sensors are often used to back up other sensors that give no
warning of imminent failure and which may fail catastrophically. Self test features and
scheduled test inputs to check for sensor drift can avoid system failure. Response to
sensor data by the operator and/or other parts of the system must also be considered in
estimating the failure rate of a sensor system.

                         Figure 19.2 Typical Flow Sensor Units

Power Source             Transceiver                            Sensor 1
                         Processor                                ADC

                         Human Interface  Sensor 2

                         Figure 19.3 Typical Sensor Network

Sensors and Transducers  19-13                                            Revision B
     Though sensors provide vital environmental information and feedback to
microcontrollers, they also increase processor workload because their signals must be
linearized, filtered, temperature compensated, scaled, and converted. New integrated
circuits, however, can convert temperature, pressure, position movement, and
acceleration signals to computer compatible equivalents. One-chip functions include
a/d converters, multiplexers, current-source, and a microcomputer that controls the
converter and processor sensor data. Sensor-specific information such as calculated
values and calibration factors can be stored in a local memory unit. The fact that each
and every sensor system is different requires that the sensor be separated into its
individual parts for analysis using the appropriate chapters of the Handbook to estimate
each failure rate.

     In redundant sensor configurations a possible design method is the use of diversity.
Diversity is the use of different technologies to perform a required function. This
practice may involve such an approach as sensors from various manufacturers with
different sensor technology and software. Diversity has the advantage that it can
reduce the probability that two or more sensors fail simultaneously, although this effect
is limited by the fact that two or more sensors may still contain the same faults or
experience a common cause failure mode. A common cause failure mode is the failure
of multiple items from a single cause which is common to all of them such as a power
supply failure. A disadvantage of diversity can be the increased complexity of
maintenance, which in itself can lead to a higher probability of failure of the sensor
configuration. Whether the use of diversity is advisable depends on the design of the
sensor network and the application.

A reliability model of the overall sensor network can be written as follows:

TD = TD,B + S + T + C + P ....... + X                                         (19-1)

Where: TD = Failure rate of sensor, failures/million hours
         TD,B = Base failure rate of sensor, failures/million hours
            S = Failure rate of sensing element (See Table 19-4)
            T = Failure rate of the transmission line (See Reference 28)
           C = Failure rate of the computational device (See Reference 28)
            P = Failure rate of the power source (See Reference 28)
            X = Failure rate of other components comprising the sensor

                        or sensor network

Sensors and Transducers  19-14         Revision B
     The unique designs of sensors and special applications in terms of sensitivity, drift,
etc. make it difficult to assign an accurate base failure rate for a sensor. Typical
published failure rates for sensors are shown in Table 19-4 for commercial applications.
Various publications contain historical failure rates for sensors. The data does not
usually provide the design information, the environment/operating conditions under
which the sensor was used, the fluid medium in contact or any of the characteristics
listed in the section on failure modes. The failure rate can vary to a great extent mainly
because the failure rate of a sensor is mainly dependent upon manufacturing practices
and environmental conditions. Use of these failure rates must be adjusted based on
experience with similar applications and operating environment. MIL-HDBK-217 may
be helpful in applying multiplying factors for the intended operating environment. It is
recommended that the considerations provided in Table 19-5 be applied in estimating
sensor and sensor network failure rates.

Sensors and Transducers  19-15  Revision B
Table 19-4. Typical Failure Rates for Sensing Elements
            (Reference 88 and various data sources)

     Sensor                       Sensor          Technology    Failure Rate
  Transducer                    Transducer
Classification                                  Resistive           S
   Thermal               RTD                    Semiconductor
                         Thermistor             Thermoelectric    1.50
 Mechanical              Thermocouple *         Emissivity        3.50
Force/Pressure           Infrared               Bimetallic        5.00
                         Thermostat             Semiconductor     7.50
   Fluid                 Force transducer       Resistive         20.00
                         Strain gauge           Semiconductor     4.00
   Optical               Strain gauge           Magnetic          7.50
                         Torque transducer      Strain gauge      23.00
   Position              Load cell              Piezoelectric     4.50
                         Fluid pressure sensor  Resistive         23.00
                         Fluid flow sensor      Capacitance       13.00
                         Fluid level sensor     Vane meter        14.30
                         Air flow sensor        Semiconductor     10.70
                         Photodiode             Semiconductor     8.50
                         Phototransistor        Semiconductor     0.16
                         Photodetector          Semiconductor     0.65
                         Infrared sensor        Photovoltaic      0.03
                         Solar cell             Resistive         7.50
                         Analog potentiometer   Semiconductor     1.00
                         Digital potentiometer  Transformer       1.50
                         LVDT                   Optical           2.50
                         Rotary encoder         Magnetic          7.50
                         Rotary encoder                           8.00
                                                                  5.00

Sensors and Transducers  19-16                                  Revision B
Table 19-4. Typical Failure Rates for Sensing Elements
                               (continued)

            (Reference 88 and various data sources)

     Sensor                        Sensor         Technology      Failure Rate
 Transducer                     Transducer
Classification                                  Resistive              S
                         Linear displacement    Resistive
     Motion              Rotary displacement    Capacitive           2.50
                         Displacement sensor    Inductive            3.50
   Presence,             Displacement sensor    Hall effect          10.70
   Proximity             Velocity sensor        Electro-magnetic     8.50
                         Velocity sensor        Rotational           2.50
Environmental            Velocity sensor        Semiconductor        3.50
                         Optical - Photosensor  Semiconductor        2.50
                         Optical - Infrared     Electro-magnetic     0.16
                         Proximity sensor       Semiconductor        7.50
                         Infrared               Piezoelectric        15.38
                         Altitude sensor        Resistive            7.50
                         Humidity sensor        Capacitive           3.39
                         Humidity sensor        Piezoresistive       20.44
                         Accelerometer          Piezoelectric        20.44
                         Accelerometer          Semiconductor        15.00
                         Strain Gauge           Ionization           13.00
                         Smoke detection        Photoelectric        23.00
                         Smoke detection                             8.00
                                                                     6.50

* A thermocouple exhibits a very small output voltage and will normally require an amplifier unless
inputted to a measuring device. Failure rate does not include amplifier, controller or power supply.

Sensors and Transducers  19-17                                    Revision B
                  Table 19-5. Sensor and Sensor Network
                        Failure Rate Considerations

1. Battery life, battery backup, uninterruptible power supply
2. Sensor connectors, connections
3. Individual sensor failures/redundant sensor connection
4. Average reading of multiple sensors
5. Sensor accuracy requirements
6. Short term and long term drift
7. Sensor positioning in target area
8. Data routing efficiency
9. Number of sensor nodes in the network
10. Data generation rate of sensor nodes
11. Energy consumption rate
12. Response timing requirements
13. Corrosive environment, protective coating
14. Operating temperature
15. Shock and vibration requirements
16. All potential failure modes listed in Table 19-2 and/or Table 19-3

19.5 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 19, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of a
sensor, transducer or sensor network.

19. Hindhede, U., et al, Machine Design Fundamentals, John Wiley & Sons, NY,
       1983.

28. MIL-HDBK-217, "Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment"

88. Reliability Analysis Center, "Nonelectronic Parts Reliability Data", NPRD-95

113. Meine van der Meulen, "On the Use of Smart Sensors, Common Cause Failure
        and the Need for Diversity", Center for Software Reliability, City University,
        London, 2008

114. Zhanyang Zhang and Miriam R. Tausner, "Using Markov Process to Model
        Wireless Sensor Network Life Expectancy with QoS Constraints, Department
        of Computer Science, College of Staten Island/City University of New York, 2008

Sensors and Transducers  19-18  Revision B
                         20 CHAPTER

                                                          SHAFTS

20.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     20.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
     20.2 FAILURE MODES............................................................................................ 2
     20.3 MODEL DEVELOPMENT ................................................................................ 3
     20.4 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR SHAFTS.......................................................... 4

        20.4.1 Base Failure Rate...................................................................................... 5
        20.4.2 Shaft Surface Finish Multiplying Factor ..................................................... 5
        20.4.3 Material Temperature Multiplying Factor ................................................... 6
        20.4.4 Shaft Displacement Multiplying Factor ...................................................... 7
        20.4.5 Stress Concentration Multiplying Factor.................................................... 8
     20.5 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 12

20.1 INTRODUCTION

     A shaft is a rotating member, usually of a circular cross section, used to transmit
power or motion. It provides the axis of rotation, or oscillation of other parts such as
gears, flywheels and pulleys and controls the geometry of their motion. One of the
functions of a shaft is transmitting torque from one element to another on the shaft.
Power is transmitted by means of rotational motion and developed torque from one end
of the shaft to the other. An example would be a compressor as a load driven by a
motor with the compressor shaft connected to the motor shaft via a shaft coupling.
Typical shaft loads include such components as fluid drivers, gears, splines and pulleys.
Reliability issues for shafts include material strength, rotational speed, shear stress,
temperature, and the operating environment.

     Flexible shafts provide the capability of transmitting motion around corners. A
flexible shaft is made by winding several layers of wire around a central core. Flexible
shafts are rated by specifying the torque corresponding to various radii of curvature of
casing. A wire rope may be used as a fexible shaft. The wire rope section in Chapter
23 provides some additional information on evaluating a wire rope for reliability.

     A spindle is a short shaft. Failure modes to be considered in evaluating a spindle
for reliability and the equations and procedures for determining the failure rate for a
given application are the same as a typical shaft.

Shafts             20-1  Revision C
     Shafts are usually designed for an infinite life. Beyond 1 million stress cycles the
fatigue strength of most steels becomes constant. This value of material endurance
strength divided by the shaft load provides a factor of safety for the shaft material.
Materials used for the manufacture of shafts less than 3.5 inches in diameter are usually
cold-rolled or cold-drawn steel. Larger shafts are usually hot-rolled and then machined
to remove the decarburized surface. Shafts larger than 6 inches in diameter are usually
forged and machined to size.

    After the failure rate of the shaft is determined from the procedures in this chapter, it
can be added to other failure rates of the component such as the pump, motor or
compressor for a total component failure rate.

20.2 FAILURE MODES

     Most shafts are subject to combined rotational and bending stresses. These in turn
may be static, variable and dynamic. Sometimes flexible couplings are used as shaft
connections to reduce bending loads. Shafts are generally designed for an infinite life
and will therefore have a very low failure rate. The effect on other components is often
a more serious question. For example, in the case of a shaft supporting a gear,
excessive bending of the shaft will cause misalignment of gear teeth and uneven
distribution of tooth load, in turn, causing excessive tooth wear.

     Keyways cut into the shaft reduce its load carrying ability, particularly when impact
loads or stress reversals are involved. When a completely reversing stress is applied to
a stress concentration point, growth of a crack is accelerated at this point that can lead
to shaft fracture. Keys and keyways should be used only to locate components on the
shaft avoiding stress concentrations on the key. Changes in shaft radii contribute to
stress concentrations. Large radii between shaft sections minimize stress
concentrations at the shoulders.

        Shafts in rotation can become very unstable at certain speeds and damaging
vibrations and deflections can occur. The result is not only failure of the shaft but also
damage to components of the machine of which the shaft is a part. The rotational
speed at which this phenomenon occurs is called the critical speed of the shaft.

     Typical failure modes of a shaft are listed in Table 20-1.

Shafts  20-2  Revision C
                          Table 20-1 Shaft Failure Modes

      Failure Mode              Failure Cause                      Failure Effect

Bent shaft                - Excessive load, torque    - Assembly vibration
                          - Impact loads              - Damaged bearing, impeller, wear
Excessive shaft           - Bearing failure
deflection                                             ring, mechanical seal, gear box
Shaft                     - Dynamic loading on shaft
misalignment              - Reversing loads           - Eventual shaft damage
Damaged surface           - Critical shaft speed      - Damaged bearing, impeller, wear
finish
                           exceeded                    ring, mechanical seal, gear box
Shaft fatigue / fracture  - Unbalanced load
                                                      - Assembly vibration
Fretting corrosion        - Improper assembly         - Damaged bearing, impeller, wear
                          - Worn bearings
                          - Excessive load             ring, mechanical seal, gear box

                          - Corrosion                 - Shaft bearing failure
                          - Contaminants
                          - Manufacturing process     - Damaged bearing, impeller, wear
                          - Thermal expansion at       ring, mechanical seal, gear box

                            high temperatures         - Surface cracks, eventual shaft
                                                        failure
                          - Stress riser at fillet
                          - Stress concentration at   - Bearing, gear, coupling corrosion

                           keyway
                          - Shaft radii changes
                          - Bending fatigue
                          - Excessive velocity
                          - High torque load

                          - Relative movement of
                          tightly fitted parts

20.3 MODEL DEVELOPMENT

     Shafts are primarily designed on the basis of the torsional moment which they
transmit. This torque can be calculated using the following expression:

                          T = 3.96 x 105 hp                           (20-1)
                                   2 N

Shafts                    20-3                            Revision C
where:  T = torque, in-lbs

        hp = transmitted horsepower

        N = Shaft rpm

and the shear stress on the shaft can be calculated from the following:

        SS  =  16 T                                                      (20-2)

                d3

where:  d = shaft diameter, in

20.4 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR SHAFTS

     The reliability of the shaft itself is generally very high when compared to other
components. Studies have shown (Reference 26) that the average failure rate for the
shaft itself is about eight times less than mechanical seals and about three times less
than that of the ball bearings. The possibility that the shaft itself will fracture, or become
inoperable is very unlikely when compared to the more common component failure
modes. Normally, it will be the seals or bearings of the component that will cause the
initial problems. The effect of the shaft on reliability of other components is of greater
importance than the reliability of the shaft itself.

     The shaft reliability model is shown by the following equation:

        SH = SH ,B i C f i CT i CDY i CSC                                (20-3)

Where: SH = Shaft failure rate, failures/million cycles
          SH,B = Shaft base failure rate, failures/million cycles

                         (See Section 20.4.1)

              Cf = Shaft surface finish multiplying factor (See Section 20.4.2)

              CT = Material temperature multiplying factor (See Section 20.4.3)

             CDY = Shaft displacement multiplying factor (See Section 20.4.4)

             CSC = Stress concentration factor for shaft discontinuities (See

                         Section 20.4.5)

Shafts                          20-4       Revision C
     The above reliability equation for shafts assumes a constant rotational torque
loading due to transmitted power and completely reversed bending loads on the shaft
due to its rotation. In the case of large reciprocating loads such as those in piston
engines and compressors, this assumption must be analyzed and the failure rate
adjusted accordingly.

20.4.1 Base Failure Rate

     In a typical fatigue test, the test specimen is stressed to some value and the number
of stress fluctuations to fracture noted. The applied stress is then plotted against the
number of cycles to failure. For many ferrous metals and thermosetting plastics the S-N
(stress vs. cycles) curve approaches an asymptotic value at some stress level called the
endurance or fatigue limit. Figure 20.1 shows an example of fatigue data for mild steel
subjected to reversed stresses with an endurance limit of 27,000 lbs/in2 (Curve A). For
many materials there is no definite endurance limit and a value is determined at a

selected number of cycles, usually 108 cycles (Curve B). The base failure rate, SH,B, is

estimated from the material endurance factor by the following relationship:

        SH ,B  =  1                                                          (20-4)
                  N

Where:  SH,B = Shaft base failure rate, failures/million cycles
           N = Number of cycles to failure at application stress level, SED

         SED = Material endurance limit, lbs/in2

The endurance limit, SED, for some common steels and alloys is shown in Table 20-2.

     The multiplying factors account for environmental conditions that vary from the
normal operation. The base failure rate represents values that can be expected if all
conditions during normal operation are those of the original design. The following
discussion explains the various multiplying factors.

20.4.2 Shaft Surface Finish Multiplying Factor

    Cf is the shaft surface finish factor that adjusts the base failure rate by an amount

depending on the type of manufactured finish. If the design calls for a particular finish,
then a variation from this finish during the manufacturing process will alter the reliability

Shafts            20-5  Revision C
of the shaft. Table 20-3 shows the values and equations for the various finishes versus
material tensile strength.

        Figure 20.1 Typical S-N Curves and Endurance Limits

20.4.3 Material Temperature Multiplying Factor

     Typical material fatigue data are acquired at 160 o F. To compensate for the decline
in static and dynamic strengths, creep, and thermal expansion at high temperatures, the

temperature factor, CT, represented by Equation (20-5) is applicable for temperatures

greater than 160 0F (Reference 19).

              CT  =  460 + TAT  for TAT > 160O F              (20-5)
                        620

        and:  CT = 1.0 for TAT  160O F

Where:  TAT = Operating temperature, oF

Shafts               20-6                         Revision C
20.4.4 Shaft Displacement Multiplying Factor

     The shaft displacement factor, CDY, will vary with the amount of load the shaft will
see. Shaft misalignment and excessive deflection have a significant influence on the
reliability of shaft bearings and any seals mounted on the shaft. The estimate of shaft
deflection depends on the weight of the shaft, its physical dimensions and any
unbalance force caused by fluid flow. The basic equation for determining the shaft
displacement multiplying factor is (References 123 and 129):

                Y = F l3                                                       (20-7)
                     3E I

Where:  Y = Shaft deflection at load, in

        F = Fluid radial unbalance force or load weight, lb
        l = Shaft overhang from shaft bearing, in *
        E = Modulus of elasticity of shaft material, lbs/in2 (See Table 20-5)
        I = Shaft moment of inertia (d4/64), in4

        d = Shaft diameter, in

     * The length of the shaft from the center of the radial support bearing to the center
of the impeller or other shaft load.

     A typical shaft assembly is shown in Figure 20.2. Equation (20-8) can be used to
establish the influence of shaft deflection on failure rate for this design. Similar
equations will apply to the applicable shaft configurations.

        CDY  =  0.0043 F   X3      +           L3  +  M3  +  N3                (20-8)
                   Eb                          IL     IM         
                             I  X                            IN  

Where:  b = Specified shaft deflection, in (See Table 20-6)

        X,L,M,N = Length of shaft section, in

Shafts                     20-7                                    Revision C
20.4.5 Stress Concentration Multiplying Factor

     Most shaft failures originate at stress concentrations caused by discontinuities of
shaft geometry and loads. The previous section contains those parameters affecting
shaft loading. The total stress concentration factor is determined from the design of the
fillet between shaft sections and the extent of any shaft grooves along each shaft
section. The total shaft stress concentration factor is then determined as follows:

                CSC = CSC,R + CSC.G                                                (20-9)

where:    CSC = Shaft stress concentration factor

        CSC,R = Stress concentration factor due to transition between

                     shaft sections

        CSC,G = Stress concentration factor due to shaft grooves

     A stress concentration factor for each shoulder radii can be found using the
following equation:

        CSC ,R  =    0.3  0.2  x   D (1-r/d )                                      (20-10)
                     r/d           d 

Where:   r = Radius of fillet, in
        D = Initial shaft diameter, in (for example DL in Figure 20.2)
         d = Transitioned shaft diameter, in (for example DM in Figure 20.2)

    Table 20-4 provides typical stress concentration factors for shaft grooves, CSC,G. If
there are no grooves in the shaft, CSC,G will be equal to 1.0.

Shafts                    20-8                 Revision C
                                         r

        DX            DL                                  DM
                                                                                 DN

        X                             L                   M        N

            r                                     r

                                   h              DL               DM
              D*

        Shaft groove                              Fillet

        D* = Diameter of applicable shaft section, DL, DM, DN, DX
        h = depth of shaft groove
        r = radius of fillet or shaft groove

                       Figure 20.2 Typical Shaft Assembly

           Table 20-2. Average Values of Endurance Limits
                                   (Reference 39)

                 MATERIAL                         ENDURANCE LIMIT SED

        Steel, T,ult   200 kpsi                      0.50 T,ult
        Steel, T,ult > 200 kpsi
                                                       100 kpsi
        Magnesium
        Nonferrous Alloy                             0.35 T,ult
        Aluminum Alloy (wrought)                     0.35 T,ult
        Aluminum Alloy (cast)                        0.40 T,ult
                                                     0.30 T,ult

Shafts                                      20-9                                     Revision C
              Table 20-3. Shaft Surface Finish Factor

          FINISH                                       Cf
Polished
Ground                  1.0
Hot Rolled              0.89
Machined or Cold Drawn  0.94 - 0.0046 TS + 8.37 x 10-6 (TS)2
Forged                  1.07 - 0.0051 TS + 2.21 x 10-5 (TS)2 - 3.57 x 10-8 (TS)3
                        0.75 -4.06 x 10-3 TS + 7.58 x 10-6 (TS)2

Note: TS = Tensile strength of material, kpsi

        Table 20-4 Stress Concentration Factor SSC,G for Shaft Groves

                                     h/r

h/D     0.1   0.5       1.0          2.0       4.0     6.0              8.0

0.05    1.10  1.45      1.60  2.00             2.05    ---              ---

0.10    1.00  1.27      1.40  1.70             2.00    2.25             ---

0.20    1.00  1.10      1.20  1.31             1.60    1.75            2.00

0.30    1.00  1.10      1.10  1.20             1.35    1.48            1.55

Shafts                        20-10                         Revision C
                 Table 20-5 Shaft Material Strengths

       Shaft         Tensile      Endurance   e / u   Modulus of
     Material       Strength                          Elasticity E
                                  Strength e
Alloy steel      (Ultimate) u                             mpsi
                                        ksi
Stainless steel         ksi

High carbon      100 - 240        44 - 106    0.44              30
steel
                        80 - 230  24 - 69     0.30              29
Cast steel,
carbon                  90-210    39 - 90     0.43              30

Low alloy cast          70 - 100  35 - 50     0.50              30
steel
                        70 - 200  35 - 100    0.50              30
Cast aluminum           20 - 48    8 - 18
                        22 - 83    8 - 29     0.38              10.3
Wrought
aluminum                                      0.35 10.0 ­ 10.6

                 Table 20-6 Allowable Shaft Bending

           Application  Allowable Shaft Deflection b, inches *

        Actuator                               0.007
        Compressor                             0.025
        Motor                                  0.010
        Pump                                   0.007

    * Note 1: Default value = 0.007 inches

         Note 2: If the application requires or permits a different allowable shaft bending,

b can be adjusted accordingly.

Shafts                            20-11               Revision C
20.5 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 20, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of a
shaft assembly.

19. Hindhede, U., et al, "Machine Design Fundamentals", John Wiley & Sons, NY,
      1983

26. Igor J. Karassik et al, Pump Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York
      (1986).

39. Shigley, J.E., Mischke, C.R. "Mechanical Engineering Design", McGraw-Hill Book
       Company, NY, (1989)

123. Centrifugal Pump & Mechanical Seal Manual, William J. McNally, 2009

129. "Run Times", August 2005, Dale B. Andrews, Lawrence Pumps, Inc.

131. "Tidal Current Turbine Reliability: Power Take-off Train Models and Evaluation,
       C. Iliev and D. Val, Third International Conference on Ocean Energy, October
       2010

Shafts  20-12  Revision C
                             21 CHAPTER

                       BELT AND CHAIN DRIVES

21.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     21.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
     21.2 BELT DRIVES ................................................................................................. 2
     21.3 FAILURE MODES OF BELT DRIVES ............................................................. 5
     21.4 RELIABILITY PREDICTION OF BELT DRIVES .............................................. 6

        21.4.1 Belt Misalignment ...................................................................................... 6
        21.4.2 Belt Speed................................................................................................. 7
        21.4.3 Belt Loading .............................................................................................. 7
        21.4.4 Belt Rating............................................................................................... 10
        21.4.5 Belt Operating Temperature .................................................................... 11
     21.5 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR BELT DRIVE ................................................. 11
     21.6 CHAIN DRIVES ............................................................................................. 16
     21.7 FAILURE MODES OF CHAIN DRIVES ......................................................... 17
     21.8 RELIABILITY PREDICTION OF CHAIN DRIVES .......................................... 20
     21.9 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR CHAIN DRIVE ............................................... 22
     21.10 REFERENCES ............................................................................................ 29

21.1 INTRODUCTION

      There are a number of means to mechanically change speeds and transmit power
in industrial applications. V-belts, synchronous belts, and chains are three methods of
transmitting power between two shafts separated by a wide distance, and they are used
over a wide range of speed ratios.

      V-belt drives are a common means of transmitting horsepower and reducing speed.
They are quiet and require very little maintenance. These drives transmit power through
friction created by a wedging action of the belt in the sheave groove. V-belts work
optimally with speed ratios of up to 6:1, but are available with drive ratios up to 10:1.

      Synchronous belt drives offer positive engagement between mating teeth of a
toothed belt and a toothed sprocket. No lubrication is required and they can operate at
higher speeds than other positive engaging drives such as chain drives. Additionally,
they offer less noise at slow speeds than chain drives.

Belt and Chain Drives  21-1  Revision B
      Synchronous belts with a trapezoidal tooth profile are called timing belts. These
belts are used in power transmission applications up to 50 horsepower. Another
synchronous belt with a curvilinear tooth profile has a more rounded tooth and has
come to be known as the high torque drive, or HTD. HTD sprockets can transmit up to
300 horsepower. With a modified curvilinear tooth profile, a higher tooth angle and
slightly shallower tooth, synchronous belts can transmit up to 500 horsepower.

      Applications requiring positioning, indexing, constant speeds, and no-slip are ideal
for synchronous belt drives due to their positive tooth engagement. Additionally, wet
environments, where chains can rust and V-belts might slip, are other ideal applications.
The no-slip feature of synchronous belts leads to greater efficiency which reduces
power consumption. However, alignment, noise and high shock loads are more critical
with synchronous belt drives. Alignment needs to be held to within 1/4ş to prevent rapid
wear. High horsepower and high-speed synchronous belt drives can experience noise
problems due to rapid tooth interaction. They are also more susceptible to damage
from high shock loads. However, properly applied and installed, synchronous belt
drives can last at least 12,000 hrs.

      High torque, slow speed applications are ideal for chain drives. Chain drives are
compact, economical, and easy to install. They are capable of operating in high
temperature environments and provide no slip with no special tensioning. Additionally,
they offer the same efficiency advantages as synchronous drives due to their no-slip
feature.

      Chains are also used in serpentine drive applications and specialty conveyors
because a variety of chain attachments and types of chain are available. The versatility,
availability, and compactness of chain drives allow them to be used in all industries.
While synchronous belts and V-belts are offered only in fixed belt lengths, a chain can
be set to any length, providing for unrestricted center distance. Improper lubrication is
the primary cause for premature chain failure.

21.2 BELT DRIVES

      A belt drive is a low cost means of transmitting rotary motion from one shaft to
another. Belt drives are smooth running, operationally quiet, and resistant to start-up or
momentary overloads. Recently improved reinforcing materials have made belt drives
more practical where formally only chain drives would have been reliably employed.
Belt drives are used when large distances between shafts make gears impractical or
when operational speed is too high for chain drives. A belt drive is an assembly of belts
and pulleys including a means of attaching sheaves or pulleys to their respective shafts
to transmit power. Pulleys and belts can be used to increase or reduce speed or
torque, or to transfer power from one shaft to another.

Belt and Chain Drives  21-2  Revision B
      As shown in Figure 21.1, belts are either flat or exist in a V-shaped cross section
running on grooved pulleys.

· Flat belts: Usually a composite construction with cord reinforcement,
    suited for high speeds and relatively low power.

· Round belts: Used in agricultural machinery drives and light duty or
    appliance drives such as vacuum cleaners. Round belts are similar
    to V-belts and they run in V sheaves.

· V-belts require less tension than do flat belts, because they have more
    surface area contacting the pulley and therefore more friction. V-belts
    are comprised of a load carrying cord tensile member located at the
    pitch line, embedded in a relatively soft matrix which is encased in a
    wear resistant cover. The wedging action of a V-belt in a pulley
    groove results in a drive which is more compact than a flat belt drive,
    but short center V-belt drives are sensitive to shock. The narrow
    (wedge) V-belt provides more tensile member support than the
    classical V-belt. They handle an equivalent load, but with narrower
    face width and smaller diameter.

· Timing or synchronous belts are a specific class of belts that contain
    toothed members similar to spur gears. Timing belts are positive
    rather than friction driven since they rely on gear-like teeth on the
    pulley and belt. The teeth on the belt mesh with the teeth on the
    pulley providing for a positive, non-slip rotational drive assembly.
    Because of the toothed nature of the components, specific reduction
    ratios can be obtained along with increased power torque ratings over
    non-toothed pulleys and belts.

      There are several different belt designs. One is a fabric-wrapped construction.
The wrap provides a protective envelope that is designed to prevent damage and
prolong life. In a non-wrapped belt, none of the cross section is allocated to a wrap;
thus, the total section consists of working tensile material. This allows a higher power
rating for belts with non-wrapped construction.

      V-belts are applied in a variety of applications but work best in applications greater
than 500 RPM. They offer a great benefit in that they will slip upon overload, thus
protecting other, more expensive equipment from load surges.

      The service life of a properly designed V-drive is approximately 20,000 to 25,000
hours. This life can be dramatically less if the drive is not installed or applied properly.
V-belt drives are limited to a maximum misalignment of 1/2ş, and standard belts are
limited to operating temperatures from -20şF to 140şF. Published belt ratings are often
based on a temperature of 85şF. In addition to ambient temperatures, excessive slip

Belt and Chain Drives  21-3  Revision B
caused by worn sheave grooves, tight bends, and poor ventilation can lead to increased
belt operating temperatures. Belt life will be drastically reduced above the baseline
temperature as shown by the temperature multiplying factor curve in Figure 21.7.

                                             Figure 21.1 Belt Types

      Reliable operation of a belt drive depends on substantial tension to create a friction
that allows the belts to grip the pulleys allowing them to turn and keeping them from
slipping as they turn. Because V-belts operate based on friction and mechanical
advantage, proper tensioning of V-belts is the single most important factor necessary for
long, satisfactory operation. Too little tension will result in slippage, causing rapid belt
and sheave wear. Too much tension can result in excessive stress not only on the
belts, but also bearings and shafts. For maximum life, the belt must operate within
prescribed tension ranges and in environments compatible with material life.

Belt and Chain Drives  21-4  Revision B
21.3 FAILURE MODES OF BELT DRIVES

     The most common failure mode of belts is a broken belt caused by improper
tensioning. There is a tension at which the belt experiences optimum service life.
Above this tension belt fatigue translates into a decrease in belt life; below this tension
belt slip results in reduced belt life. Table 21-1 presents a summary of failure modes for
belt drives.

                           Table 21-1. Typical Failure Modes of Belt Drives

    FAILURE MODE                  FAILURE CAUSE               FAILURE EFFECT
Improper operating        Installation error
tension                                                 Belt failure
Pulley/sheave             Installation error
misalignment                                            Sidewall cracking and belt
                          Incorrect tension             failure
Worn pulley/sheave        Belt slippage, operating      Belt slippage and rapid wear
                          environment                   rate
Temperature extreme       Operating environment         Belt hardening and reduced
                                                        life
Chemical                  Operating environment         Belt wear and eventual
contamination                                           failure
Foreign objects in the                                  Belt wear and eventual
belt drive assembly                                     failure
                                                        Excessive heat and wear
Belt slip                 Insufficient tension          generated with reduced belt
                                                        life
Belt fatigue              Excessive tension             Broken belt

Worn belt and             Large starting and stopping   Premature belt failure
pulley/sheave,            forces greater than 10%
                          above operating conditions    Eventual belt failure
                                                        Variation in drive ratio and
Normal wear rate          Normal repetitive stressing   reduced belt life
                                                        Sidewall cracking and belt
Rapid belt deterioration  Heat build-up due to          failure
                          inadequate ventilation

Improper belt drive       Loose pulley/sheave on shaft
operation

      Misalignment can be caused by non-parallel shafts, offset pulleys, or shafts or
pulleys that have an angular skew at installation. Misalignment causes belts to

Belt and Chain Drives     21-5                          Revision B
experience sidewall stresses and uneven shock loads. As a result, the belt fails due to
sidewall cracking or rollover inside the sheaves.

      Belts running on worn pulleys are susceptible to slippage and excessive wear in
localized sidewall regions causing a reduction in belt life. Belts run on worn sheaves
can roll over in the sheaves, especially if there is any misalignment.

      Belts are usually designed to operate within the temperature range of -20F to 140
F. Elevated temperatures cause hardening, increased dynamic stiffness and reduced
ultimate elongation of the cushion compound, reducing the belts flexibility. The loss in
flexibility results in increased stress on the cushion stock. Eventually these stresses
become too high for the compound to handle and a cushion crack appears. Continued
exposure to elevated temperatures will cause a continuous increase in stress level and
continued cracking. Eventually, the cushion stock will not be able to support the cord
line and the belt will fail to function.

21.4 RELIABILITY PREDICTION OF BELT DRIVES

21.4.1 Belt Misalignment

      Parallel misalignment results from pulleys being mounted out of line from each
other. Parallel misalignment is generally more of a concern with V-type belts than with
synchronous belts because V-type belts run in grooves and are not as free to move
sideways on the pulleys. Synchronous belts on the other hand are usually able to self
align themselves as they run. However, if there is not enough clearance between the
edge of the belt and the pulley flange, the belt can become pinched causing serious
performance problems and early belt failure. Therefore, in order to maximize
performance and reliability, synchronous drive assemblies should be aligned closely, a
maximum allowable misalignment of Ľ degree. Parallel and angular misalignments are
shown in Figure 21.2.

                       Figure 21.2. Belt Misalignment

Belt and Chain Drives  21-6                            Revision B
21.4.2 Belt Speed
Belt speed V is defined as:

                             V  =  12DN                                    (21-1)
                                     

Where:                 V = Belt speed, ft/min

                       D = pitch diameter, in
                       N = rotational speed, RPM

      The ratio between the velocity in RPM of the faster shaft and that of the slower
shaft is called the speed ratio:

        Speed Ratio = RPM faster shaft = Dia.larger pulley                 (21-2)
                          RPM slower shaft Dia.smaller pulley

      Belt speed is an important consideration in estimating the design life of a belt.
Higher speeds require increased belt tension to compensate for higher centrifugal force.
In general, increasing speed increases belt life because the tight side belt tension
decreases with increasing speed. See Equation (21-3). However, if the belt speed is
too high, the increase in centrifugal tension can more than offset the decrease in tight
side belt tension and belt life can be reduced. See Equation (21-5). In timing belt drives
(toothed belt) higher speeds generate dynamic forces resulting in increased tooth
stresses and shorter belt life. Belt manufacturers normally provide a horsepower rating
of the belt for specified belt speeds. The impact of belt speed on belt loading is
explained in the next section.

21.4.3 Belt Loading

      The belt on a belt drive assembly must be sufficiently tight to prevent slip causing a
belt tension on both sides of the driven pulley or sheave. When the belt drive assembly
is stationary with no power being transmitted, the tension on both sides of the pulley is
equal. When the drive is rotating and transmitting power there is a tight side tension on
the input side of the driven pulley and a slack side tension on the output side of the
pulley. Figure 21.3 shows these tensions.

      The ratio of the tight side to the slack side tension is called the tension ratio. The
higher the tension ratio, the closer the belt is to slipping, i.e., the belt is too loose. The
difference in these two tensions is a working tension. The working tension is calculated
as follows:

Belt and Chain Drives              21-7                        Revision B
                       TW  =  33,000 HP                                               (21-3)
                                   V

where:  TW = Tight side tension (TT) ­ slack side tension (TS), lbs

        HP = Horsepower, hp = 33,000 ft-lbs/min

          V = Belt speed, ft/min

                                         slack slide
                                         tension

                                         tight side
                                         tension

        Driver Pulley                                 Driven Pulley

                       Figure 21.3 Belt Tensions

A belt experiences three types of tension as it rotates around a pulley:

- Working tension, TW. Equal to tight side tension,TT ­ slack side tension, TS

(See equation (21-3))

- Bending tension, TB. As the belt bends around the pulley, one part of the pulley

is in tension, the other in compression. The bending of the belt around a pulley
introduces tension in the tensile member of the belt, the amount of tension
dependent on the radius of the bend.

                              TB  =  CB                                               (21-4)
                                     d

where:  TB = Bending tension, lbs
        CB = Constant depending on belt size and construction, in-lbs

         d = Pulley diameter, in

Belt and Chain Drives                21-8                                 Revision B
- Centrifugal tension, TC occurs in a belt drive because of the centrifugal force
caused by the belt which has weight rotating around the pulley. Centrifugal
tension depends on the belt speed.

                              TC = MV 2                                              (21-5)

where:     TC = Centrifugal tension, lbs
            M = Constant related to belt weight, lbs/(ft/min)2

             V = Belt speed, ft/min

      There are certain times as the belt moves on the pulley when the three types of
tension are cumulative:

                        TPEAK = TT + TB + TC                                         (21-6)

These tensions on the belt are shown in Figure 21.4

                           2                     1             6

                           3                     4             5

                              TB                        TB

                    TB                                               TB

           TS                                       TT                   TS

                                                    TC                         1
                                                                         Revision B
        1               2  3                  4             5     6

Belt and Chain Drives      Figure 21.4 Belt Drive Tensions
                                            21-9
     Peak tension, TPEAK, is directly related to belt life. The impact of peak tension
(loading) on belt failure rate is shown in Figure 21.5.

                                             300.0

Belt Failure Rate, failures per million hou  250.0

                                             200.0         E
                                             150.0
                                             100.0                           D
                                                                               C
                                              50.0                                 B
                                                                                      A

                                             0.0
                                                 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110

                                                                                       Peak Tension, lbs

                                             A = 100 ft/min
                                             B = 200 ft/min
                                             C = 500 ft/min
                                             D = 750 ft/min
                                             E = 1000 ft/min

                                                             Figure 21.5 Impact of Belt Loading on Failure Rate

21.4.4 Belt Rating

     The manufacturer of the belt will usually publish the horsepower rating of the
particular belt being used or considered for a belt drive design. In some cases the
torque rating is supplied which can be equated to horsepower using the equations in
Section 21.4.3. It may also be possible to use the horsepower rating of the prime mover
for the drive shaft. It must be remembered that the life of a flat or round belt is very

Belt and Chain Drives                               21-10                                                        Revision B
much dependent on the tension of the belt and therefore dependent on maintenance
procedures and the tension of the belt at the initial installation and any equipment
repair. After the actual horsepower of the belt is computed using the equations in
Section 21.4.3, it can be compared to the rated horsepower of the belt. The relationship
of this horsepower ratio to estimated failure rate is shown in Figure 21.6

21.4.5 Belt Operating Temperature

      Belts can operate successfully in temperatures from about -20 F to 140 F. Outside
this temperature range, belt reliability depends on special belt materials. Belt life will
normally decrease exponentially with an increase in temperature. Cold temperatures
have a more dramatic effect on belt life. In extremely cold weather, the belt can fail
when compounds within the belt structure reach their glass transition temperature
causing a catastrophic belt failure.

      Excessive slip caused by worn sheave grooves, tight bends and poor ventilation
can lead to increased belt operating temperatures. These factors need to be considered
in addition to the ambient operating temperature in determining belt temperature.

21.5 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR BELT DRIVE
      The failure rate of the total belt drive can be estimated with the following equation:

BD = BD,B i CBL i Ct i CPD i CBT i CBV i CSV + P              (21-7)

where:

       BD = Failure rate of belt drive under specific operating conditions,

                     failures/million hours

     BD,B = Base failure rate of belt, 40 failures/million hours

         CBL = Multiplying factor for belt loading (See Section 21.4.3, Section 21.4.4

                    and Figure 21.6)

           Ct = Multiplying factor for belt operating temperature (See Section 21.4.5

                     and Figure 21.7)

         CPD = Multiplying factor for pulley diameter (See Figure 21.8)

         CBT = Multiplying factor for belt type (See Table 21-2)
         CBV = Multiplying factor for belt drive operating service (See Table 21-3)

Belt and Chain Drives  21-11                      Revision B
CSV = Multiplying factor for belt drive shock environment (See Table 21-4)

 P = Failure rate for driver and driven pulleys, 0.8 failures/million hours for

          flat pulleys, 1.5 failures/million hours for grooved pulleys

Belt Load Multiplying Factor, CBL  14.0
                                   12.0
                                   10.0

                                    8.0
                                    6.0
                                    4.0
                                    2.0
                                    0.0

                                        0.70 0.80 0.90 1.00 1.10 1.20 1.30 1.40 1.50 1.60 1.70 1.80 1.90 2.00

                                                                              Actual hp / Rated hp

                                   CBL  =  0.3  +    hpO / hpD  4.2
                                                        1.1     

where:                                     CBL = Belt load multiplying factor
                                           hpO = Operating load, ft-lbs/min
                                           hpD = Design or specified load, ft-lbs/min

                                        Figure 21.6 Belt Load Multiplying Factor, CBL

Belt and Chain Drives                                                21-12             Revision B
                                    8.0

                                    7.0

Temperature Multiplying Factor, Ct  6.0

                                    5.0

                                    4.0

                                    3.0

                                    2.0

                                    1.0

                                    0.0           20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
                                        -20 0

                                                      Operating Temperature, TO , degrees F

                                         Ct    =  1
                                                  2t

                                         where: t = 0 for Operating Temperature , TO = -20 F to 40 F

                                         and:         t = 40 - TO  for operating temperature , TO > 40 F

                                                             55

Figure 21.7 Multiplying Factor for Belt Operating Temperature, Ct

Belt and Chain Drives                                              21-13                     Revision B
                                     7.0

Pulley Size Multiplying Factor, CPD  6.0

                                     5.0

                                     4.0

                                     3.0

                                     2.0

                                     1.0

                                     0.0

                                          2       3             4  5      6                        7  8              9

                                                                   Driven Pulley Diameter, PD, in

                                          CPD  =  2x    4.5  2
                                                        PD   

where: PD = Diameter of driven pulley, in

                                             Figure 21.8 Multiplying Factor for Pulley Diameter, CPD

Belt and Chain Drives                                              21-14                                 Revision B
                       Table 21-2 Belt Type Multiplying Factor, CBT

                       Belt Type           Belt Type Multiplying

                          SPZ                    Factor, CBT
                          SPA
                          SPB                           0.8
                          SPC                          0.48
                                                       0.33
                            Y                          0.18
                            Z                          9.09
                            A                          4.16
                            B                          0.93
                            C                          0.54
                            D                          0.30
                                                       0.14

                       Table 21-3 Belt Operating Service Factors, CBV

                                               Reference 39

                       Driver Pulley                                   Driven Pulley

Low or normal torque (small AC    High or non-uniform torque
motors, shunt wound DC motors,    (single phase AC motors, series
small engines                     wound DC motors, large internal
                                  combustion engines)

Intermittent Normal Continuous Intermittent Normal Continuous          Typical loads

service  service service          service  service service

                                                                       Blowers, small

                                                                       fans,

1.0      1.1           1.2        1.1      1.2  1.3                    centrifugal

                                                                       pumps,

                                                                       compressors

                                                                       Generators,

1.1      1.2           1.3        1.2      1.3  1.4                    machine tools,

                                                                       rotary pumps

Belt and Chain Drives             21-15                                Revision B
Table 21-4. Shock Environment Service Factors, CSV

Driven                 Source of Power
Machinery
No shock               Low or Normal Torque  High or Non-uniform Torque
Light shock                          1.1                       1.2
Medium shock                         1.2                       1.3
Heavy shock                          1.3                       1.5
                                     1.4                       1.7

21.6 CHAIN DRIVES

     A chain is a reliable machine component, which transmits power by means of
tensile forces, and is used primarily for power transmission and conveyance systems.
The function and uses of a chain drive are similar to those of a belt drive. The two most
common types of chain include steel chain, especially the type called roller chain, which
makes up the largest share of chains being produced, and plastic chain. Metal chain
drives are normally used for applications below 3000 rpm where accuracy and reliability
must be greater than that provided by rubber belts. Chain drives will usually maintain a
constant speed under varying load conditions because the metal chain does not slip or
stretch and will need only infrequent adjustment.

      A chain drive is a combination of chains and sprockets and a means of shaft
mounting. A chain can be defined as a series of links, connected and fitted into one
another to form what is in effect a flexible rack with a series of integral journal bearings.
In its simplest form a chain drive consists of two sprockets of arbitrary size and a chain
loop. Sprockets are wheels with external teeth shaped so that they can fit into the links
of the drive or driven chain. The center distance from one hinge or joint to the next is
known as the pitch of the chain and is the primary identifying dimension.

      Some of the advantages of chain drives over belt drives include:
             · No slippage between chain and sprocket teeth
             · Negligible stretch allowing chain drives to carry heavy loads
             · Less sensitive to dust and humidity than belts and not adversely affected
                  by sun, oil or grease
             · Operation at higher temperatures than belt drives

Belt and Chain Drives  21-16                 Revision B
        · Longer operating life expectancy because flexure and friction contact
            occur between hardened bearing surfaces separated by an oil film

        · Longer shelf life because of less susceptibility to storage conditions and
            non-deterioration of metal

Some of the potential reliability problems associated with chain drives include:
       · Chain drives can elongate due to wearing of link and sprocket teeth
            contact surfaces
       · Chain drives require frequent or, in some applications, continual lubrication
       · Sprockets often need to be replaced when worn chains are replaced
            because of wear
       · Chain drives are limited to slower speeds than belt drives

21.7 FAILURE MODES OF CHAIN DRIVES

There are several ways a chain can fail:

    · In a tensile failure, the chain is overloaded in tension until it is
         stretched so badly it will not function properly, or it is literally pulled
         apart.

    · If the chain is loaded repeatedly in tension, at a load below the yield
         strength (the chain is not stretched) microscopic cracks will develop in
         the link plates. These cracks continue to grow until the chain breaks.

    · In a wear failure, material is removed by sliding, or sliding combined
         with abrasion or corrosion, until the chain will not fit the sprockets.
         Either the mechanism will not function properly or the remaining
         material is so thin that the chain breaks.

    · Galling is rapid wear caused by metal seizure between the chain pin
         and bushing. This rapid wear is caused by the combination of
         excessively high speeds and loads.

     Parts of a chain drive are shown in Figure 21.9. Chain drives require tensioning on
a regular basis. When the chain has "stretched" by approximately 3 percent the chain
typically requires replacement. All the components of the chain (rollers, pins, bushings)
have lost their case hardened surface properties at this point and failure is imminent.

     Design life of a chain depends on adequate lubrication. Proper lubrication reduces
the wear on all moving surfaces of the chain, and helps cushion the chain drive from
shock loading. The type of lubrication method varies dependent upon the speed and
operating environment. Manual lubrication involves periodic application of oil from an
oiler or brush and is used for slow speed and intermittent operation. Oil bath lubrication

Belt and Chain Drives  21-17        Revision B
is best for most applications and involves submerging the lower strand of chain in a
chain casing oil sump. Recirculating oil systems or forced lubrication can be used to
provide continuous lubrication to the chain. This method is more common in high speed,
high horsepower applications.

                       Figure 21.9 Parts of a Chain Drive

      The key factor causing a chain to jump the sprocket teeth is chain wear elongation.
Because of wear elongation, the chain creeps up on the sprocket teeth until it starts
jumping sprocket teeth and can no longer engage with the sprocket. When a chain is
operating, the outer surface of the pin and inner surface of the bushing rub against one
another creating constant wear. Proper lubrication reduces the amount of wear but
does not eliminate it.

      As the surface of the pin is reduced by wear, the rigidity of the pin decreases and
eventually fatigue failure may result. How much wear is acceptable and at what point
operation is no longer acceptable depends on the application. When wear elongation is
less than or equal to 1.5 percent for a transmission chain, or less than or equal to 2
percent for a conveyor chain, there is almost no risk of fatigue failure.

Belt and Chain Drives  21-18                               Revision B
     Chain sprockets can operate in a variety of environments. Dust and dirt can easily
be separated from oil through proper circulation and filtering, allowing chain drives to be
operated in rather harsh environments. Furthermore, chain drives can be used in high
temperature environments, provided sufficient lubrication is available that won't break
down at elevated temperatures.

     In summary, the failure modes of a chain drive will depend on its application and the
allowable performance in terms of noise and chain elongation. Table 21-5 provides a
summary of possible chain drive failure modes.

                       Table 21-5. Typical Failure Modes of Chain Drives

FAILURE MODE             FAILURE CAUSE                  FAILURE EFFECT

Turned/galled pins       Inadequate lubrication         Damaged chain

Enlarged holes           Overload                       Damaged chain

Broken pins and/or link  Extreme overload               Damaged chain and
plates                                                  sprockets

Worn link plate          Chain rubbing on chain guide Damaged chain
contours

Cracked link plates      Excessive loading; corrosive - Chain fatigue failure

                         environment                    - Stress corrosion failure

Broken, cracked or       Excessive speed, chain riding  Damaged chain
deformed rollers         too high on sprocket teeth

Chain climbs sprocket Excessive chain slack;            Chain and sprocket wear
                                                        failure
teeth                    overload

Foreign objects in the   Operating environment          Chain wear and eventual
chain drive assembly                                    failure

Excessive noise          Chain interference; loose
                         casing; excessive chain slack; Eventual chain damage
                         inadequate lubrication

Bushing/roller fatigue Chain loading                    Chain wear and eventual
                                                        failure

Chain elongation         Link-pin joint wear            Chain begins to skip teeth
                                                        followed by complete failure

Tensile fatigue loading Sideplate loading               Sudden catastrophic chain
                                                        failure

Belt and Chain Drives                 21-19                               Revision B
21.8 RELIABILITY PREDICTION OF CHAIN DRIVES

      For a chain drive to transmit power, the driven sprocket must be rotated against a
resisting torque. In contrast to belt drives, one strand of a chain drive must always be
slack. Thus, power is transmitted solely by the tension side.

      Chain drives are less sensitive to dust and humidity than belts and are not
adversely affected by sun, oil or grease. They can also operate at much higher
temperatures than belts and they do not slip. Chain drives do require frequent
lubrication (continual in some applications), they require very close alignment, and since
the do not slip they provide no overload protection.

      In Figure 21.10, the left sprocket is the driving side (power input) and the right
sprocket is the driven side (power output). As counterclockwise rotation power is
applied to the driving sprocket while adding resistance to the driven sprocket, then the
chain is loaded in tension mainly along the D-A span, and tension is smaller in the other
parts. Figure 21.11 shows this relation.

                       Figure 21.10 Typical Chain Drive Under Load

Figure 21.11 Chain Load with the Addition of Resistance

      As a chain is subject to increasing stress or load, it becomes longer. This
relationship can be graphed as shown in Figure 21.12. The vertical axis shows

Belt and Chain Drives  21-20                                        Revision B
increasing stress or load, and the horizontal axis shows increasing strain or elongation.
In this stress-strain graph, each point represents the following:

       · O-A: elastic region
       · A-C: plastic deformation
       · B: maximum tension point
       · C: actual breakage

        Figure 21.12 Effect of Increasing Stress on Chain Length

      The chain speed for a given sprocket diameter and sprocket angular velocity is
given by:

                       S =  nD = PNn                                   (21-8)
                             12 12

where:

        S = Chain speed, ft/min
        n = Sprocket speed, rpm
        D = Sprocket pitch diameter, in
        P = Chain pitch, in (equal to the center-to-center distance between

               chain hinges or joints)

        N = Number of teeth of sprocket

For a chain drive with two sprockets, the speed ratio is:

Belt and Chain Drives  21-21                               Revision B
                           n2 = N1           (21-9)
                           n1 N2            (21-10)

And the chain tension is:  T = 33,000 i HP
where:                                 S

 T = chain tension, lbs
 S = Chain speed, ft/min
HP = Horsepower to be transmitted, hp

21.9 FAILURE RATE MODEL FOR CHAIN DRIVE

      A graph showing the area of reliable operation of a chain drive and the impact of
chain speed on horsepower and resulting failure mechanisms is shown in Figure 21.13.
The location of Line O-A in Figure 21.13 depends on the chain's allowable tension,
including the fatigue strength of the connecting or offset links and the centrifugal force in
high-speed rotation. Line B-C depends on the breakage limit of the bushing and roller.
In this kind of breakage of the bushing and roller, there is no fatigue limit as there is with
the link plates. The location of line D-E depends on the bearing function of the pin and
the bushing. The range defined within these three lines (O-A, B-C, and D-E) is the
usable range. When the chain is used at low speeds, it is limited by line O-A, the fatigue
limit.

      Horsepower ratings are based upon the number of teeth and the rotating speed of
the smaller sprocket, either drive or driven. The pin-bushing area, as it affects allowable
working load, is the important factor for medium and higher speeds. For very low
speeds, the limiting factor is the ultimate tensile strength of the chain. Figures 21.14
and 21.15 show the effect of RPM on horsepower rating of the chain.

      In normal operation, the position at which the chain and the sprockets engage will
fluctuate and the chain will vibrate along with this fluctuation. Even with the same chain,
if the number of teeth in the sprockets is increased (change to larger diameter),
vibration will be reduced. A decrease in the number of teeth in the sprockets will cause
an increase in vibration. This is because there is a pitch length in chains, and they can
only bend at the pitch point.

Belt and Chain Drives      21-22            Revision B
                       B           A            Brush & Roller
                                                Fatigue

        Horsepower                                    D

                                                                            C

                       Link Plate  Pin Galling
                       Fatigue

                                                                         E

                          Small Sprocket RPM

                    Figure 21.13 Typical Chain Drive Failure Modes

      Considering the failure modes and stress considerations of chain drives, the
following equation can be developed for estimating the failure rate of chain drives:

        CD = CD,B i CCV i CCS i CCT i CCI i CST + CS                           (21-11)

where:

         CD = Failure rate of chain drive under specific operating conditions,

                    failures/million hours

        CD,B = Base failure rate of chain, 15 failures/million hours

         CCV = Multiplying factor for operating service (See Table 21-7)

         CCS = Multiplying factor for chain speed (See Table 21-8)

         CCT = Multiplying factor for chain operating temperature (See

                    Table 21-9)

          CCI = Multiplying factor for lubrication method (See Table 21-10)

          CST = Multiplying factor for sprocket design (See Figure 21-16)

         CS = Failure rate for driver and driven sprockets, 0.8 failures/million

                    hours

Belt and Chain Drives     21-23                                             Revision B
                   20.0

Horsepower Rating  15.0
                                                    24 teeth

                   10.0

                   5.0                                        12 teeth

                  0.0
                      100 300 500 700 900 1100 1300 1500 1700

                                                       RPM of Smaller Sprocket

                  Figure 21.14 Horsepower Ratings for Typical Single-Strand,
                         Roller-Chain Drive (ANSI No. 60, ľ inch pitch)

      It is important to remember that when determining the horsepower ratings from
manufacture's catalogs that the total horsepower rating of a multiple strand is not a
simple multiplication of a single chain horsepower rating times the number of strands.
Use the applicable factor from Table 21-6 to determine the total horsepower rating of
multiple strand chains.

Belt and Chain Drives                                         21-24     Revision B
                   40.0

                   30.0
                                          37 teeth

Horsepower Rating  20.0                             21 teeth

                   10.0

                   0.0      750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250 2500
                       500
                                                   RPM of Smaller Sprocket

                   Figure 21.15 Horsepower Ratings Per Inch Width for Typical
                                    Silent-Chain Drive (ľ inch pitch)

                            Table 21-6. Multiple Strand Factor

                            Number of Roller        Multiple Strand
                             Chain Strands               Factor
                                      1                     1.0
                                      2                     1.7
                                      3                     2.5
                                      4                     3.3
                                      5                     3.9
                                      6                     4.6

Belt and Chain Drives                               21-25            Revision B
                   Table 21-7. Chain Drive Operating Service Factors, CCV

                            Driver Sprocket                          Driven Sprocket
                       Slight shock (electric
Smooth running         motors with frequent    Moderate shocks       Type of Driven Load
(electric motors,      starts, internal        (internal combustion
turbines)              combustion engine       engines with
                       with hydraulic          mechanical coupling
         1.0           coupling)
                                                                     Smooth (conveyers
         1.4                       1.1
                                                      1.3            with small load
         1.8                       1.5                               fluctuations,

                                   1.9                               centrifugal blowers)

                                                                     Some impact

                                                                     (conveyers with some

                                                      1.7            load fluctuations,
                                                                     centrifugal

                                                                     compressors, marine

                                                                     engines)

                                                                     Large impact

                                                      2.1            (machines with
                                                                     reverse or large

                                                                     impact loads

                       Table 21-8 Chain Speed Multiplying Factor, CCS

                       Chain Speed                         CCS

                       < 50 ft/min                         1.0

                       50 ­ 100 ft/min                     1.2

                       > 100 ­ 160 ft/min                  1.4

Belt and Chain Drives                          21-26                           Revision B
Table 21-9 Chain Temperature Multiplying Factor, CCT

                       Temperature              CCT

                        170 oC                  1.0

                       170 ­ 200 oC             1.5

                       > 200 ­ 260 oC           2.0

Table 21-10 Chain Lubrication Multiplying Factor, CCI

Type of Lubrication                                  CCI

                       Manual Operation              1.5

                       Drip Lubrication              1.0

                       Bath Lubrication              0.8

Stream Lubrication                                   0.7

Belt and Chain Drives                    21-27            Revision B
                               1.5

Tooth Multiplying Factor, CST  1.0

                               0.5

                               0.0

                                    15  16  17  18  19     20  21                 22  23     24          25

                                                    Number of Sprocket Teeth, ST

where:                                                        CST = 19/ST

                                        ST = Number of teeth on smaller sprocket

                                        Figure 21.16 Multiplying Factor for Sprocket Design

Belt and Chain Drives                               21-28                                    Revision B
21.10 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 21, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of belt
and chain drives.

19. Hindhede, U. et al, Machine Design Fundamentals, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1983

39. Shigley, J.E., Mischke, C.R., Mechanical Engineering Design, McGraw-Hill Book
      Co., NY, 1989.

58. Parmley, R.O., Mechanical Components Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY,
     1985

84. Machinery's Handbook, 27th Edition, Industrial Press, 2004

87. Childs, T.H.C., Dalgarno, K.W., Day, A.J. and Moore, R.B., "Automotive Timing
     Belt Life and a User Design Guide", Proceedings of the Institute of Mechanical
     Engineers, 1998

88. Reliability Analysis Center, "Nonelectronic Parts Reliability Data", NPRD-95

89. SINTEF Industrial Management, "OREDA Offshore Reliability Data", 4th Edition,
      2002

90. The Complete Guide to Chains, Tsubakimoto Chain Company, 1995

91. Renold Transmission Chain Selection Procedure

106. Design and Analysis of Machine Elements, Douglas Wright, Department of
       Mechanical and Materials Engineering, The University of Western Australia

107. Salzman, R.H. and Reaburn, S. M. "Probabilistic Modeling for Timing Belt Fatigue
       Life Predictions Using Accelerated Testing", Int. J. of Materials & Product
       Technology, 2001

110. John L. Wright, "Chains for Drives and Conveyors ­ Lube `Em to Last", Machinery
       Lubrication Magazine, March 2002

Belt and Chain Drives  21-29  Revision B
                       This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Belt and Chain Drives  21-30                               Revision B
                         22 CHAPTER

                                       FLUID CONDUCTORS

22.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     22.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
     22.2 PIPE................................................................................................................. 2

        22.2.1 Failure Modes of Pipe Assembly ............................................................... 3
        22.2.2 Reliability Prediction of Pipe Assembly ..................................................... 3
     22.3 TUBING ........................................................................................................... 6
        22.3.1 Failure Modes of Tubing Assembly ........................................................... 6
        22.3.2 Reliability Prediction of Tubing Assembly.................................................. 8
     22.4 HOSE............................................................................................................... 8
        22.4.1 Failure Modes of Hose Assembly.............................................................. 9

           22.4.1.1 Metallic Hoses .................................................................................. 11
           22.4.1.2 Non-metallic Hoses........................................................................... 11
        22.4.2 Reliability Prediction of Hose Assembly .................................................. 12
     22.5 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 14

22.1 INTRODUCTION

     Fluid conductors are the means by which the entire fluid system is connected. It is
therefore very important to assure the reliability of the various connections in the
system. Many times in evaluating a fluid system for reliability, the major components
such as pumps, valves and actuators are analyzed in detail while overlooking the fluid-
carrying link between the components. Individual fluid conductors are usually very
reliable from a design standpoint but there may be a large number of these components
in the overall system and their reliability can be very sensitive to the operating
environment. Even with all the technological advancements in hydraulic systems, fluid
leakage remains one of the most aggravating causes for unscheduled maintenance
actions.

     Conductors of a fluid power system are basically of three types: pipe, tubing and
hose. A pipe is a rigid conductor not intended to be bent or shaped into a configuration.
Tubing is a semi-rigid fluid conductor which is usually bent into a desired shape for the
particular application. A hose is a flexible fluid conductor which can be adapted to
components that move during operation. Newer designs are combining tubing and
hoses as hybrid assemblies. These assemblies provide the strength and heat

Fluid Conductors   22-1  Revision A_
dissipation characteristics of metal tubing with the flexibility and vibration dampening
characteristics of hose.

     There are many factors to consider when evaluating the reliability of a fluid
conductor system. The failure modes presented in this Chapter should be considered
for the particular application of the fluid conductor because the failure rate of a fluid
conductor is probably more sensitive to the operating environment of the system in
which it is installed than to its design parameters. Each application must be evaluated
individually because of the many installation, usage and maintenance variables that
affect the failure rate.

22.2 PIPE

     Piping components of a fluid system are designed for an internal pressure to
compensate for the most severe conditions of fluid pressure and temperature expected
in normal operation. In addition to normal fluid operating pressures, potential back
pressures, pressure surges, temperature fluctuations and performance variations of
pumps, valves and other components must also be considered in the evaluation of fluid
conductor systems. To meet these requirements, the greatest required pipe thickness
and highest flange rating must be utilized.

     Older fluid conductor systems are comprised of threaded pipe and many hydraulic
systems had NPT ports (American Standard Taper Pipe Threads for General Use).
This type of connection is the least reliable for high-pressure fluids as the thread itself
provides a leak path. Because pipe threads are deformed when tightened, any
subsequent movement, either loosening or tightening, increases the potential for leaks.
Threaded connections have more recently been replaced by more reliable soft seal
connections.

     Most failures of fluid conductor systems occur at or within the interconnection points
such as fittings and flanges. These areas are sensitive to installation and maintenance
procedures and the inclusion of seals. Reliability of the system therefore depends on
the proper selection of interconnecting components that are compatible with each other
and the operating environment. Considerations include strength, ductility, hardness,
and corrosion resistance. System temperatures also need to be evaluated when
estimating reliability. A single over-temperature event of sufficient magnitude can
permanently damage all the seals in an entire high-pressure fluid system resulting in
numerous leaks. Prolonged operation at above-normal temperatures can produce the
same results.

     Typical pipe system materials include high density polyethylene (HDPE), cross
linked polyethylene (PEX), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), polyvinyl chloride
(PVC), stainless steel, carbon steel, copper and ductile iron. One material does not
exhibit a significant difference in lifespan from another. When properly designed and
installed, pipe systems of any of these materials can be sufficiently durable to exhibit

Fluid Conductors  22-2  Revision A_
extremely low failure rates. Plastic pipe can exhibit some long term failure modes due
to chemical attack, deterioration from ultraviolet rays, change in dimension (creep) and
environmental stress cracking. Failure data indicates no difference in the failure rate
between pressure and gravity flow systems assuming proper pipe material selection
and layout and proper tightness of pressure system connections to avoid leaks.

22.2.1 Failure Modes of Pipe Assembly

     As mentioned previously, most failures of a pipe assembly occur at or within the
interconnection points. Failure modes of a pipe assembly include material properties
that are incompatible with the fluid being transported or with the surrounding operating
environment. A common failure mode in pipe systems is caused by a sudden reduction
in liquid flow in a pipe. When a valve is abruptly closed, dynamic energy is converted to
elastic energy creating a pressure wave called water hammer that can cause pipe
failure.

       The following failure modes need to be considered when evaluating a pipe
assembly for reliability:

           · Burst failure caused by internal pressure
           · Buckling caused by external pressure
           · Bending failure
           · Stress related failure from applied loads
           · Excessive leakage at the interconnection points

     Table 22-1 provides a summary of potential failure modes of a pipe assembly.

22.2.2 Reliability Prediction of Pipe Assembly

     The failure modes presented above should be considered for the particular
application of the fluid conductor. The failure rate of a fluid conductor is extremely
sensitive to the operating environment of the system in which it is installed as compared
to the design of the pipe. Each application must be evaluated individually because of
the many installation, usage and maintenance variables that affect the failure rate.

     The internal pressure in piping normally produces stresses in the pipe wall because
the pressure forces are offset by pipe wall tension. The longitudinal stress from
pressure is calculated by:

                  SL =  PD D                               (22-1)
                         4t
                                                Revision A_
Fluid Conductors        22-3
where:            SL = Longitudinal stress, psi
                  PD = Internal design pressure, psi
                  D = Outside pipe diameter, in

                    t = Pipe wall thickness, in

                  Table 22-1. Typical Failure Modes of Pipe Assemblies

       FAILURE MODE  FAILURE CAUSE                        FAILURE EFFECT
Damaged connector
Burst failure        - Corrosion                          Gradual increase in system
Buckling failure     - Improper torque on fitting         leakage
Bending failure      - Gasket failure
Crack in rigid pipe
                     - Rapidly applied load               Catastrophic pipe assembly
Leakage              - Pressure transients                failure

Fatigue failure      - Insufficient piping                Immediate leakage above
                      supports                            system requirements

                     - Bend radius less than              Immediate leakage above
                      allowable                           system requirements

                     - External stress                    System leakage

                     - Chemical incompatibility           Gradual increase in system
                      with fluid                          leakage

                     - Chemical attack/improper
                      thread sealant

                     - Ultraviolet deterioration

                     - Water hammer from                  System fluid leakage
                      upstream component

The burst pressure of the pipe is determined as follows:

                     P = 2tS                                         (22-2)
                           D
                                                          Revision A_
where: P = Burst pressure, psi

Fluid Conductors                22-4
                   t = Pipe wall thickness, in
                  S = Tensile strength of pipe material, psi
                  D = Outside pipe diameter, in

And the working pressure is equal to:

                  WP = P                                                   (22-3)
                          sf

where: WP = Working pressure, psi
            sf = Safety factor (normally equal to approximately 3.0)

     The failure rate of a piping assembly depends primarily on the connection joints and
the base failure rate of a piping assembly from various data sources can be estimated
at 0.47 failures/million operating hours per connection and the total failure rate of the
pipe assembly can be estimated with the following equation:

                  P = P,B i CE                                             (22-4)

where:   P = Failure rate of pipe assembly, failures per million hours
        P,B = Base failure rate of pipe assembly, 0.47 failures/million

                  hours

         CE = Environmental factor, see Table 22-2

                  Table 22-2. Pipe Assembly Environmental Factor, CE

                Operating Environment            Multiplying Factor, CE

Normal duty, non-flex pipe, ambient conditions,               1.0
no vibration or shock
                                                              1.2
Heavy duty, flexible pipe under random                        1.4
pulsations

Severe duty, vibration and shock environment

     See Chapter 3 of this Handbook to determine the failure rate of any seals being
used in the pipe connectors.

Fluid Conductors              22-5                            Revision A_
22.3 TUBING

     Components on many types of hydraulic equipment are connected together by
semi-rigid tubing. Tubing is light-weight compared to pipe and can be bent and
assembled on-site to meet specific system configurations. Material types for tubing
include aluminum, corrosion-resistant steel and titanium. These materials provide good
heat dissipation for the system fluid.

     There are many factors that can lead to tubing failure. Because it is semi-rigid,
tubing can transmit vibration from one component to another throughout the equipment.
Therefore, many hydraulic designs utilize bent tubes and hoses providing the weight
and bend advantages of bent tube with the flexibility and vibration dampening
characteristics of hose. Although tubing is generally a better heat dissipater than hose,
in some applications the use of hose can actually result in less heat buildup because of
improved laminar flow through the more gradual bends created between hose
connections.

     Connectors for hydraulic tubing are either permanent swaged fittings or AS
(Aerospace Standard) type fittings. Swaged fittings require special repair equipment
and procedures, but their reliability is extremely good and they are light-weight. AS
fittings require tubes to be flared at 37 degrees on the ends which adds to the cost of
the tubing. AS fittings need to be selected based on their pressure rating. A common
cause of leakage from 37 degree flare fittings is incorrect torque. Insufficient torque
results in inadequate seat contact, while excessive torque can result in damage to the
tube and connector through cold-working. Newer AS fittings are not flared; instead, the
sleeve bites into the tube. All metal-to-metal connections, such as compression and
flared type, are sensitive to excessive torque. Thus, the failure rate of line connections
is dependent on assembly methods and will significantly affect the infant failure region
of the failure rate bathtub curve.

     When the conductor assembly is used to provide actuator movement, it will be
subject to vibration, which changes the torque on plumbing connections and causes
metal fatigue. Reliability is thus affected by the routing of the fluid conductor assembly
and methods of tubing support. Tube bending and fabrication require special
equipment, proper training and experience to acquire reliable connections.
Misalignment and excess bending cause strain on the tubing, which can lead to leakage
or line failure once in service. Improper deburring and flaring can eventually lead to
stress cracks after the lines have been installed. All of these considerations need to be
part of the reliability analysis.

22.3.1 Failure Modes of Tubing Assembly

     Leakage is the most common failure mode in fluid systems. Connections that
incorporate an elastomeric seal such as a BSPP (British Standard Pipe Thread) or a
SAE-4 bolt flange offer the highest seal reliability. NPT is the least reliable type of

Fluid Conductors  22-6                   Revision A_
connector for high pressure hydraulic systems because the thread itself provides a leak
path. The threads are deformed when tightened and as a result, any subsequent
loosening or tightening of the connection increases the potential for leaks. Table 22-3
provides a summary of potential failure modes for tubing assemblies.

Table 22-3. Typical Failure Modes of Tubing Conductor Assemblies

    FAILURE MODE       FAILURE CAUSE                          FAILURE EFFECT
Stress cracks
Metal fatigue          - Excessive strain from misalignment
Compressed air line                                                         System leakage
leak
                       - Improper deburring and flaring
Damaged connector
Tubing burst           - Vibration                            System leakage
Fluid leakage
                       - Line misalignment                    Reduced compressor
Tube buckling failure  - Vibration                            life
                       - Excessive torque loading on

                        compression fittings

                       - Improper torque on fitting           System leakage
                       - External impact

                       - Pressure transients                  Immediate tubing
                       - Suddenly applied load                assembly failure

                       - Chemical incompatibility with fluid  Gradual increase in
                       - Improper thread sealant              system leakage

                       - Tubing support failure               Immediate leakage
                                                              above system
                                                              requirements

     Plastic tubing will exhibit different failure modes than that for metal tubing. One
common failure mode is caused by the change of properties of the plastic over time
and/or temperature. The strength and stiffness of many common plastics change
dramatically over a relatively small change in temperature. Some plastics such as PVC
can become brittle and will shatter when exposed to lower temperatures. The stiffness
of many plastic materials changes when exposed to heat. Likewise, the amount of load
or stress that some plastics can withstand will change over time (creep). Plastics can
also fail when combining stress and chemicals (environmental stress cracking).

Fluid Conductors                    22-7                      Revision A_
22.3.2 Reliability Prediction of Tubing Assembly

     The equations for determining the burst and working pressures of a tubing
assembly are the same as those derived for pipes in Section 22.2.2. The failure rate of
a tubing assembly depends primarily on the connection joints. Accordingly, the base
failure rate can be derived from various data sources as 1.33 failures/million operating
hours per connection and the total failure rate of the tubing assembly can be estimated
with the following equation:

                  T = T ,B i CE                                         (22-5)

where:             T = Failure rate of tube assembly, failures per million hours

                  T,B = Base failure rate of tube assembly, 1.33 failures/million

                             hours
                    CE = Environmental factor, see Table 22-4

                  Table 22-4. Tubing Assembly Environmental Factor, CE

                  Operating Environment         Multiplying Factor, CE

           Normal duty, ambient conditions,                  1.0
           no vibration or shock

           Heavy duty, random fluid pulsations  1.2

           Severe duty, vibration and shock     1.4
           environment

     See Chapter 3 of this Handbook to determine the failure rate of any seals being
used in the tubing connections.

22.4 HOSE

     A hose assembly is comprised of three basic elements including the inner tube to
convey the fluid, reinforcement to withstand the fluid pressure, and outer cover to
protect the hose from abrasion and other environmental conditions. The failure rate of a
hose assembly depends on its size, temperature, application, media, and pressure.
However, even knowing all the operating parameters of a system, it is still difficult to

Fluid Conductors  22-8                               Revision A_
predict the expected service life of a hose because of unknown service and operating
conditions. The predicted service life in this section assumes an adequate maintenance
program that includes fluid cleanliness and visual inspections for abrasion, heat
damage, etc.

22.4.1 Failure Modes of Hose Assembly

     Hose assemblies have a finite life, the main factor contributing to failure being
service conditions. The following factors will affect the service life of metal hose:

            · Pitting corrosion
            · High fluid velocity combined with chemical abrasives
            · Stress corrosion
            · Vibration
            · Torsion fatigue
            · Tight radius bending and constant motion

Table 22-5 provides a summary of failure modes for hose assemblies.

     Operating pressure ­ The maximum operating pressure within the hose should not
exceed the recommended working pressure as specified by the manufacturer.
Specified burst pressure of the hose should never be used as the operating pressure.
Exposing the hose to surge pressures and pressure spikes above the working pressure
of the hose can cause the hose to expand and contract and shorten hose life.

     Operating temperatures ­ Continuous use of a hose at or above the maximum
allowable operating temperature will cause deterioration of the hose material and loss of
fitting retention. Fluid and ambient temperatures, both static and transient must not
exceed the limitations of the hose. A single over-temperature event of sufficient
magnitude or prolonged operation at above-normal temperature can permanently
damage the seals in the hose assembly resulting in leakage. At higher temperatures,
plasticizers tend to leach out of elastomers at a rate depending on the temperature and
duration at the high temperature. Proximity of the hose to other components producing
high temperatures can contribute to this failure mode. Excessively low temperatures
can cause the hose to harden, take on a permanent set, and initiate hose cracking.

     Application ­ An individual hose assembly is designed for a specific range of
pressures, flows and temperatures and deviating from these design parameters in
actual usage will obviously shorten the design life. Excessive flow velocity, for example,
will damage the inner tube, especially at hose bends, and cause premature failure.
Improper hose length can also cause failures from hose stretching in a hose assembly
that is too short or excessive bending in a hose that is too long for the application. In
general, mobile applications face harsher conditions than non-mobile permanent
installations due to abrasion.

Fluid Conductors  22-9                 Revision A_
                  Table 22-5. Typical Failure Modes of Hose Assemblies

   FAILURE MODE                 FAILURE CAUSE               FAILURE EFFECT
                                                       - Continual increase in size
Metal hose fatigue    - High flow velocity
failure               - Flexing of corrugations         of crack until complete
Excessive shear                                         fracture
stress in metal hose  - Twisting the hose during
Irregular cracks in    installation                    - Circumferential cracks
metal hose                                             - Leakage and eventual
Inner tube            - Vibration
deterioration                                            failure
                      - Elevated temperature           - Eventual hose failure
Excessive fluid                                        - Contaminants entering
temperature           - High fluid temperature caused
                       by excessive flow velocity       system
Fractured hose
                      - Excessively small bend radius  - Premature hose failure
Hose leakage          - Hose bend immediately behind
                                                       - Reduced ability to
Inner tube failure     the coupling                     withstand internal
                      - Continuous exposure to high     pressure

                       temperature                     - Loss of hose flexibility
                      - Chemical deterioration
                                                       - Eventual hose failure
                      - Inadequate compatibility with
                       fluid

     External forces ­ Flexing the hose to less than its minimum bend radius, twisting or
kinking the hose will reduce hose life. Evaluating a hose for reliability must therefore
include an examination of fittings and adapters designed to prevent the impact of
external forces. Excessive abrasion can damage the hose cover, accelerating hose
failure.

     Fluid and environmental compatibility ­ The expected life of a hose assembly
depends on the chemical resistance of the tube, cover, 0-ring fitting and other hose
components and compatibility with the fluid being used and the environment. A fluid
incompatible with a hose will shorten the design life of the hose. Consideration must be
given to the chemical composition of the environment surrounding the fluid conductor

Fluid Conductors      22-10                            Revision A_
assembly as well as the media being conducted including abrasive particles and
corrosive properties when estimating the failure rate. Ultraviolet light, ozone, salt water
and various chemicals can shorten hose life

     Hose configuration ­ The size of the hose assembly components must be adequate
to keep pressure losses to a minimum and avoid damage to the hose due to heat
generation or excessive turbulence.

22.4.1.1 Metallic Hoses

     There are several factors associated with flexing that affect the service life of
corrugated metal hose. Service life may be affected by factors external to the metal
hose assembly such as the chemical composition of the environment surrounding the
hose assembly as well as the media being transferred.

     Turbulent flow of abrasive chemical media over the alloy surface of the hose may
cause accelerated corrosion or erosion-corrosion. Liquids or gases that have
suspended solid particles will wear or remove the oxide protective film of the hose and
leave the alloy exposed and more susceptible to corrosion.

     Fatigue is another failure mode to be considered. The flexing of the corrugations
during hose operation can cause a failure of a progressive nature. Stress generated by
flexure, pulsation, torsion, vibration and flow induced vibration are some other causes
for fatigue failure. Applications where the flow of a liquid or gas is above manufacturer
specifications and a liner is not incorporated into the hose assembly can result in
premature fatigue failure. The high flow velocity causes the corrugations to vibrate at a
high frequency and, if the vibration is near the natural frequency of the hose, failure can
occur very quickly.

22.4.1.2 Non-metallic Hoses

     The most common causes of a non-metallic hose assembly failure include:
      · flexing the hose to less than the specified minimum bend radius
      · twisting, pulling, kinking, crushing, or abraiding the hose
      · operating the fluid system above maximum or below minimum temperature
      · exposing the hose to surges in pressure above the maximum operating

         pressure
      · intermixing hose, fittings and other parts that are not compatible

     All hoses are rated with a maximum working temperature. Exposure to continuous
high temperatures can lead to the hose losing its flexibility. Exceeding these

Fluid Conductors  22-11  Revision A_
temperatures can reduce hose life by as much as 80%. When hoses are exposed to
high external and internal temperatures simultaneously, there will be a significant
reduction in hose service life.

     Bending a hydraulic hose in more than one plane results in the twisting of its wire
reinforcement. A twist of five degrees can reduce the service life of a high-pressure
hydraulic hose by as much as 70% and a seven degree twist can result in a 90%
reduction in service life. Multi-plane bending is usually the result of inadequate
clamping where the hose is subjected to mechanical motion.

     Operating conditions have a direct effect on the service life of a hose assembly.
Temperature extremes can accelerate the aging of the hose's rubber tube and cover.
Frequent and extreme pressure fluctuations will accelerate the fatigue of hose material.

22.4.2 Reliability Prediction of Hose Assembly

     The failure rate of a hose is very hard to determine because of the varied operating
conditions. For example, failure rate data indicates that approximately 80% of hose
failures are attributable to external physical damage through pulling, kinking, crushing,
or abrasion of the hose. Abrasion caused by hoses rubbing against each other or
surrounding surfaces is a very common type of hose damage. In operation, hoses on
diesel engines will have higher failure rates than those used on gasoline engines since
diesel engines run hotter than gasoline engines, temperature accelerates chemical
reaction and chemical deterioration causes hose failure.

     The failure rate of a hose in its operating environment can be determined with the
following equation:

                  H = H ,B i CT i CE                         (22-6)

where:             H = Failure rate of hose assembly, failures per million hours
                  T,B = Base failure rate of hose assembly, 1.85 failures/million hours
                   CT = Temperature factor, see Figure 22.1
                   CE = Environmental factor, see Table 22-6

Fluid Conductors                      22-12     Revision A_
Temperature Multiplying Factor, CT  7.0
                                    6.0
                                    5.0
                                    4.0
                                    3.0
                                    2.0
                                    1.0
                                    0.0

                                        60 50 40 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 -40 -50

                                                                                TR - TO, oF

                                    CT    =  1
                                             2t

                                    Where:         t = (TR - TO ) for (TR ­ TO)  40 oF

                                                               18

                                    and:     C     = 0.21  for (TR ­ TO)  > 40 oF
                                                T

                                    TR = Rated Temperature of Hose, oF
                                    TO = Operating Temperature of Hose, oF

                                             Figure 22.1 Temperature Multiplying Factor, CT

Fluid Conductors                                           22-13                             Revision A_
                  Table 22-6. Hose Assembly Multiplying Factor, CE

             Environment          Environmental Factor, CE

Normal duty, ambient conditions,                  1.0
no vibration or shock                             1.2
                                                  1.5
Heavy duty, random fluid
pulsations

Severe duty, vibration and shock
environment

22.5 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 22, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of fluid
conductors.

88. Reliability Analysis Center, "Nonelectronic Parts Reliability Data", NPRD-95

92. PST =>Solutions! ,Volume 3, October 1996

Fluid Conductors  22-14                                             Revision A_
                              23 CHAPTER

                        MISCELLANEOUS PARTS

23.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

23.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 2
23.2 AXLE............................................................................................. 2

   23.2.1 Axle Failure Modes.................................................................................... 3
   23.2.2 Axle Failure Rate....................................................................................... 3
23.3 BOLT............................................................................................................... 3
   23.3.1 Bolt Failure Modes .................................................................................... 3
   23.3.2 Bolt Failure Rate........................................................................................ 4
23.4 BUSHING ......................................................................................................... 5
   23.4.1 Bushing Failure Modes.............................................................................. 5
   23.4.2 Bushing Failure Rate................................................................................. 6
23.5 CAM MECHANISM ........................................................................................... 6
   23.5.1 Cam Mechanism Failure Modes................................................................ 7
   23.5.2 Cam Mechanism Failure Rate ................................................................... 8
23.6 FITTING........................................................................................................... 8
   23.6.1 Fitting Failure Modes................................................................................. 8
   23.6.2 Fitting Failure Rate .................................................................................... 9
23.7 FLYWHEEL ................................................................................................... 10
   23.7.1 Flywheel Failure Modes .......................................................................... 10
   23.7.2 Flywheel Failure Rate.............................................................................. 10
23.8 HINGE...........................................................................................11
   23.8.1 Hinge Failure Modes ............................................................................... 12
   23.8.2 Hinge Failure Rate .................................................................................. 12
23.9 KEYS AND PINS ........................................................................................... 12
   23.9.1 Key and Pin Failure Modes ..................................................................... 13
   23.9.2 Key and Pin Failure Rate ........................................................................ 13
23.10 PILLOW BLOCK .......................................................................................... 13
   23.10.1 Pillow Block Failure Modes.................................................................... 13
   23.10.2 Pillow Block Failure Rate....................................................................... 14
23.11 POWER SCREWS....................................................................................... 14
   23.11.1 Power Screw Failure Modes.................................................................. 15
   23.11.2 Power Screw Failure Rate..................................................................... 16
23.12 RIVET .......................................................................................................... 16
   23.12.1 Rivet Failure Modes .............................................................................. 17

Miscellaneous Parts     23-1  Revision B
        23.12.2 Rivet Failure Rate.................................................................................. 18
     23.13 SETSCREW ................................................................................................ 18

        23.13.1 Setscrew Failure Modes........................................................................ 19
        23.13.2 Setscrew Failure Rate ........................................................................... 20
     23.14 WIRE ROPE ................................................................................................ 20
        23.14.1 Wire Rope Failure Modes...................................................................... 21
        23.14.2 Wire Rope Failure Rate......................................................................... 22
     23.15 REFERENCES ........................................................................................... 22

23.1 INTRODUCTION

     The failure rate of a total mechanical or hydraulic system depends upon the active
components of the system such as pumps, valves, gears and springs. The system will
normally contain passive or non-moving parts as well, such as pins, couplings, nuts and
bolts. The reliability of these passive or non-moving parts can be very hard to predict
partly because their individual failure rates are small and little failure rate data have
been compiled. A structural analysis of each part is often not warranted; yet, their
cumulative failure rate data must be considered in the total reliability analysis. This
chapter provides some guidance on estimating miscellaneous part failure rates. It also
provides the appropriate section in this Handbook for specific mechanical parts where
additional guidance on evaluating the part for reliability can be obtained.

     The design evaluation procedures in other chapters of this Handbook provide a
failure rate based on a detailed understanding of the design and operating environment
of the component being considered. In contrast, the items in this Chapter are normally
passive parts with limited availability of published failure rate data. The provided failure
rate may require a modification based on personal experience with the part in the
system being analyzed and its operating environment.

23.2 AXLE

     An axle is a non-rotating member which carries no torque and is used to support
rotating wheels and pulleys. The failure rate of an axle is dependent on material
properties, weight of the wheel or pulley and its operating environment including shock
and vibration. It is difficult to estimate a failure rate for an axle without performing a
detailed stress analysis, since an axle is normally designed for infinite life and the failure
rate almost totally dependent on operating conditions.

     In the process of evaluating an axle for reliability, it is important to consider the total
axle system. A bent axle, for example, will cause subsequent failure of bearings,
bushings, wheels and other components that are mounted on the axle.

Miscellaneous Parts  23-2  Revision B
23.2.1 Axle Failure Modes

     The following table includes some typical failure modes to consider when evaluating
an axle for reliability.

                             Table 23-1. Typical Failure Modes for an Axle

     FAILURE MODE               FAILURE CAUSE       FAILURE EFFECT
                           Shock, vibration
Fatigue failure at stress  Bending stresses    Crack growth, eventual
raiser                                         breakage

Bent axle                                      Axle mounted component
                                               failure
Unstable rotation          Vibration
Uneven rotation                                Axle fatigue and
                           Loose mounting      breakage
                           assembly
                                               Axle mounted component
                                               failure

23.2.2 Axle Failure Rate

     A stress-strength analysis is required to accurately estimate the failure rate of an
axle for the intended operating environment. For estimating purposes, a typical failure
rate for a shaft will be 0.01 failures/million hours. Consideration of this failure rate must
include the evaluation of the parts mounted on the shaft that may be sensitive to axle
failure mechanisms. The procedures in Chapter 20 can be used to determine the failure
rate for small axles and shafts that are a part of pump, motor, compressor or other
component.

23.3 BOLT

     Structurally, a bolt acts as a pin to keep two or more parts from slipping relative to
each other, or to clamp two or more pieces together. In either case the bolt must be
tightened properly if it is to perform its intended function. Thus, the failure rate of a
bolted joint is very much dependent on the assembly or rework process.

23.3.1 Bolt Failure Modes

     The possible failure modes of a bolted joint depend on the application. In fluid
systems, for example, a failed bolted joint may result in leakage, the definition of
leakage, in turn, dependent on the type of fluid being contained and the criticality of the
leak. For machinery that is subject to shock and vibration, self-loosening, corrosion and

Miscellaneous Parts        23-3                Revision B
fatigue are failure modes of concern. Table 23-2 lists some of the potential failure
modes of a bolted joint.

                     Table 23-2 Typical Failure Modes for a Bolt

   FAILURE MODE              FAILURE CAUSE                FAILURE EFFECT

Loose bolt           Insufficient clamp force or  Joint movement, fluid leakage,
                     preload, excessive shock     eventual fatigue failure
Plastic deformation  and/or vibration
Sheared bolt                                      Tensile failure
Stripped threads     Applied force overload,      Fatigue failure
                     excessive bearing pressure   Eventual bolt failure

                     Repeated loading, vibration

                     Excessive preload

23.3.2 Bolt Failure Rate

     Approximately 75 different factors affect the tension created in a single bolt when a
torque is applied. Still more variables must be considered when a group of bolts in an
assembly is tightened. Fortunately, the design process of bolted joints is well
established for normal machine designs and the failure rate quite low. A typical failure
rate of a bolt based on published failure rate data is 0.12 failures per million hours. This
failure rate can usually be assumed for the bolted system including the washers, nuts
and threadlocking devices. Table 23.3 provides recommended multiplying factors to
adjust the base failure to consider the operating environment.

                     Table 23-3 Service Factors for a Bolt

                        LOADING                    NORMAL    CONTINUOUSLY
                                                  VIBRATION  HIGH VIBRATION
Light loading (office type equipment)
Medium loading (compressors, large motors)             1.00           1.50
Heavy loading (Production equipment, trucks,           1.25           1.88
aircraft, shipboard)                                   1.67           2.50

Very heavy loading (construction equipment,            2.50           3.75
tanks
                                                                       Revision B
Miscellaneous Parts  23-4
     Just as failure modes are dependent on the application of the equipment, so must
the failure rate be adjusted per the individual machine design and the number of bolts
being used. For a complex machine design where weight or potential deformation
becomes a factor, a finite element or stress analysis is usually performed. Detailed
procedures for evaluating a bolt or other threaded fastener for reliability are contained in
Chapter 16.

23.4 BUSHING

     A mechanical bushing is a type of vibration isolator providing an interface between
two parts, dampening transmitted energy from one part to the other. A bushing is also
used as a bearing that is inserted into a housing to provide a bearing surface for rotary
applications. This is the simplest type of bearing, comprising just a bearing surface and
no rolling elements. The shaft in contact with the bearing slides over the bearing
surface.

     There are many different bushing designs for particular applications. Sleeve
bushings or journal bearings are used to protect steel shafts from wear due to a
combination of pressure and rotating motion. Slide bushings are used where accurate
linear movement of a large object is required. A ball bushing permits rotation, sliding
motion or both. A bushing blank is used as an insert in a hole to reduce the inside
diameter of the hole and protect the surrounding body structure from damage resulting
from vibrational and loading stress. Many bushings are press fit into structures and can
be replaced after wear without requiring replacement of the entire structure.

     Chapter 7 contains the procedures for evaluating a plain bearing for reliability
including the failure modes to be considered. These same procedures can be used for
determining the failure rate of a bushing.

23.4.1 Bushing Failure Modes

     Failure modes of a bushing depend on the application of the bushing. Mechanical
bushings may be a fixed or removable cylinder metal lining used to constrain, guide, or
reduce friction, or they may be a threaded adapter to permit joining of pipes with
different diameters. In some applications leakage past the bushing can be a potential
failure mode. Some leakage can be expected since by design there is a gap between
the bushing and shaft. Bushings are also used in chain drives providing separation
between lubrication and contaminants. Chapter 21 contains failure mode information
on these types of bushings. Table 23-4 provides typical failure modes for bushings to
be considered in a reliability analysis.

Miscellaneous Parts  23-5  Revision B
                     Table 23-4. Typical Failure Modes for Bushing

       FAILURE MODE            FAILURE CAUSE              FAILURE EFFECT
Loose on shaft           Vibration                   Loose coupling
Corrosion                Dissimilar materials/fluid  Shaft failure
                         Misalignment, excessive     Bushing failure
Structural failure       load                        Bushing failure
                         Over tightening             Damaged grease seal
Damaged set screw
Loss of radial or axial  Loss of lubrication
movement

23.4.2 Bushing Failure Rate

     The failure rate of a bushing depends on many design factors including the yield
strength of the material, hardness, elastic modulus, thermal conductivity, and galling
resistance. Application variables include load, shaft speed, surface contaminants,
lubrication and clearance. In highly loaded, slowly rotating systems, the maximum
bearing pressure is considered a key design criterion. Maximum pressure is the highest
compressive stress a bushing can sustain without failure due to cracking or spalling.
Normally, this maximum pressure should be no greater than twice the yield strength of
the bushing material. For less highly loaded but more rapidly rotating systems, the
pressure-velocity (PV) limit is a factor determining failure rate. In this case pressure is
the total weight supported by the shaft converted to a compressive load, and velocity is
the rotational speed converted to a velocity.

     Typical published failure data for a bushing would indicate a failure rate of 0.72
failures/million hours. Obviously, this rate needs to be adjusted depending on personal
experience with the application. In some cases the bushing is an integral part of a
shaft. Chapter 20 provides guidance on determining a failure rate for this application.
Chapter 21 contains information on the use of bushings in a chain linkage.

23.5 CAM MECHANISM

     A cam is a projecting part of a rotating wheel or shaft that strikes a lever at one or
more points on its circular path. The cam can be a simple tooth to deliver pulses of
power or an eccentric disc or other shape to produce a smooth oscillating motion in the
follower. A cam-follower is the lever or output link making contact with the cam. The
follower can be in the form of a roller, it may be a flat face or spherical in shape.

Miscellaneous Parts      23-6                                       Revision B
     Cam-followers are fitted between the camshaft lobe and the driven mechanism such
as the end of a valve stem or push rod which it operates. Cam-followers reduce wear
on the camshaft and ensure that the driven mechanism operates smoothly. Follower
size is determined by the total useful force requirement.

     After the cam-follower displacement curve is established, the unit is sized for long
service life with minimum weight and size. Cam size with respect to pressure angle and
radius of curvature is an important design consideration. The pressure angle at any
point on the profile of a cam is the angle between the direction where the follower wants
to go at that point and where the cam wants to push it. It is the angle between the
tangent to the path of follower motion and the line perpendicular to the tangent of the
cam profile at the point of cam-roller contact. If the pressure angle exceeds 30 degrees
for a radial cam for example, the force exerted on the cam may too great resulting in
reduced life and accuracy.

23.5.1 Cam Mechanism Failure Modes

     The primary failure mode of a cam-follower is wear. A cam does not necessarily
operate at a constant drive speed and high speed cam-follower mechanisms often
exhibit substantial drive speed fluctuations. These fluctuations are caused by changes
in the angular velocity of the driving mechanism due to load variations, and backlash
between the driving mechanism and the cam. The following table provides failure
modes that need to be considered in a reliability analysis of cam mechanisms.

Table 23-5. Typical Failure Modes for a Cam Mechanism

     FAILURE MODE        FAILURE CAUSE              FAILURE EFFECT

Cam follower error       Excessive pressure         Cam mechanical error
                         angle, high torque during
Drive speed fluctuation  follower acceleration      Rapid wear and
                         Load variation and/or      mechanical error
Loose shaft/cam contact  backlash                   Loss of mechanical
                                                    motion
Worn cam- follower       Loose shaft pin            Cam mechanical error
contact                                             and loss of follower
Cam/follower material    Excessive load, binding    contact
fracture
                         Excessive load             Loss of follower contact

Miscellaneous Parts      23-7                       Revision B
     Chapter 18 of this Handbook contains some additional guidance for evaluating the
design of slider-crank mechanisms and the failure modes to be considered.

23.5.2 Cam Mechanism Failure Rate

     The failure rate of a cam mechanism from various data sources is 6.1 failures per
million hours. This failure rate is dependent on the operating speed of the cam
mechanism; friction and wear rate between the driving mechanism, cam, and follower;
and the material properties of the individual parts. Equations contained in Chapter 9
can be used to estimate the wear rate of a cam mechanism. Chapter 18 of this
Handbook contains some additional guidance for evaluating the design of slider-crank
mechanisms.

23.6 FITTING

     Fittings are designed to seal fluid within a fluid system. A multitude of options exist
for fittings in fluid systems. One type of fitting is an all-metal fitting which relies on
metal-to-metal contact. Another design employs O-rings to contain pressurized fluid. In
either design, tightening threads between the mating halves of the fitting or between the
fitting and component port, forces the two mating surfaces together to form a seal.
Quick disconnect couplings can significantly improve the serviceability of fluid systems
by saving maintenance time. Couplings incorporating valves can automatically shut off
fluid flow and maintain system pressure.

     It is important to consider chemical compatibility of the coupling materials with
respect to fluid media and the strength of coupling materials with respect to functional
requirements of the application. Plastic couplings are lightweight and used for many
low pressure applications. Metal couplings are typically chosen when high fluid
pressure, vibration and other more severe operating conditions call for greater strength
and durability.

23.6.1 Fitting Failure Modes

     Leakage is the primary failure mode of fluid systems. Compression fittings that
incorporate an elastomeric seal offer the best seal reliability. NPT is the least reliable
type of connector for high pressure hydraulic systems because the thread itself provides
a leak path. The threads become deformed when tightened and subsequent loosening
or tightening of the connection increases the probability of leakage. Flared fittings are
inexpensive and simple in design. The metal-to-metal seal of the flare is subject to
seepage at high fluid pressures. Some flare joint fittings employ a conical washer
between the nose and flare to reduce the probability of leakage. A common cause of
leakage from flare joints is incorrect torque. Insufficient torque results in inadequate

Miscellaneous Parts           23-8  Revision B
seat contact and excessive torque can cause cold working damage to the tube and
connector. Torque can also be affected by vibration, vibration also causing metal
fatigue of the connector.

     The reliability of a fitting employing an elastomeric seal depends on fluid
compatibility and fluid temperature. Fluid operating temperatures above 85OC can
cause damage to many seals. Table 23-6 provides some typical failure modes to be
considered in evaluating a fitting for reliability. See Chapter 3 for a listing of failure
modes for the seal itself.

                             Table 23-6. Typical Failure Modes of a Fitting

     FAILURE MODE           FAILURE CAUSE                  FAILURE EFFECT

Fluid seepage               - Damaged sleeve or ferrule
Fractured plastic housing
                            - Damaged O-ring               Eventual fitting failure
Leakage
                            - Incorrect assembly
Damaged flare joint, fluid
leakage                     - Shock, vibration             Fitting failure
Damaged seal
                            - Fluid incompatibility        - Generation of
                                                            contaminants in system

                                                           - Eventual fitting and
                                                            component failure

                            - Incorrect tightening during  Fitting failure
                             assembly

                            - Fluid temperature above      System leakage
                              acceptable limit

23.6.2 Fitting Failure Rate

     The failure rate of a fitting can be estimated as 1.3 failures per million hours for a
threaded fitting and 2.4 failures per million hours for a quick disconnect fitting based on
published failure rate data. However, failure modes as discussed in the previous
section need to be addressed in estimating the failure rate. NPT ports, for example, will
have a higher failure rate for high-pressure hydraulic systems because the thread itself
provides a leakage path. The evaluation procedures in Chapter 3 can be used to
estimate the reliability of an individual O-ring seal. If the fitting contains a shut-off valve,
refer to Chapter 6 to estimate its reliability.

Miscellaneous Parts         23-9                                            Revision B
23.7 FLYWHEEL

     Flywheels store kinetic energy as a mechanical battery and are used to smooth the
variations in shaft speed that are caused by loads or power sources that vary in a cyclic
fashion.

     Overall performance of the flywheel depends on a sufficient moment of inertia,
matching the power source to the load, and resulting performance requirements. One
of the main considerations in flywheel design is balancing. By design, flywheels are
devices with large inertia and they must, therefore, be balanced to remove eccentric
loading and reduce the loading on bearings and other components.

     The spinning of a flywheel creates stress at the inner hub connection which can
lead to fracture Estimating the failure rate of a flywheel must therefore consider the
flywheel velocity. Rotating parts such as a flywheel can be simplified to a rotating ring
to determine stress levels.

23.7.1 Flywheel Failure Modes

     Flywheels develop large stresses at their inter hub connection due to dynamic
forces caused by spinning. These stresses can lead to failure. Table 23-7 includes
some failure modes to consider when evaluating flywheel reliability.

                     Table 23-7. Typical Failure Modes for a Flywheel

     FAILURE MODE                  FAILURE CAUSE        FAILURE EFFECT

Flywheel loosened from        Broken shaft/wheel   Uncontrolled release of
shaft                         connection           energy

Flywheel fracture             Centrifugal forces   Complete loss of output
                                                   energy
System vibration              Unbalanced flywheel
                                                   Shaft/bearing damage

23.7.2 Flywheel Failure Rate

     The failure rate of a flywheel depends on a design balance between rotational
speed, material density and tensile strength. Flywheel performance depends on an
optimum energy-to-mass ratio and the flywheel must therefore spin at the maximum
possible speed since kinetic energy increases only linearly with mass but increases as
the square of rotational speed. However, a rapidly rotating object is subject to

Miscellaneous Parts           23-10                                    Revision B
centrifugal force that can create sudden fatigue failure. While dense material can store
more energy than low density material, the flywheel is also subject to higher centrifugal
force and thus fails at lower rotational speed than one comprised of low density
material. Therefore, the tensile strength of the flywheel material becomes an important
reliability consideration.

     A base failure rate of 0.2 failures per million hours can be assumed for a flywheel
based on published failure rate data. Table 23-8 provides service factors to modify the
expected failure rate of a flywheel for the expected operating environment.

                     Table 23-8. Service Factors for a Flywheel

   Driven               Normal        Normal    High Torque,     High Torque,
Machinery            Torque, Low  Torque, High  Low Velocity     High Velocity

Uniform                 Velocity     Velocity                           1.4
Light shock                1.1                                          1.5
Medium                     1.2    1.3           1.2                     1.6
shock
Heavy                      1.3    1.4           1.3                     1.7
shock
                           1.4    1.5           1.4

                                  1.6           1.5

23.8 HINGE

     A hinge is a joint that holds two parts together so that one can swing relative to the
other. Most hinges are separate parts which are added to a completed assembly for
further installation. Living hinges, on the other hand, are molded into a part during the
forming process. A Butt Hinge is composed of two plates attached to abutting surfaces
of a door and door jamb and joined by a pin. A Gravity Hinge closes automatically as a
result of the weight of a door to which it is attached. A Strap Hinge is a surface
mounted hinge with long flaps of metal on each side, by which it is secured to a door
and adjacent post or wall. A Pintle Hinge pivots about an upright pin or bolt. A Spring
Loaded Hinge can automatically open or close a door, eliminating the need for a latch to
secure the door in its resting position.

     Rotation of a hinge is permitted along only one axis, and during bending the neutral
axis does not change length. Therefore, in the elastic case, the hinge can be
considered as a beam undergoing pure bending, and the neutral axis forms a circular
arc. Built-in plastic hinges generally undergo some plastic deformation. The hinge

Miscellaneous Parts               23-11                          Revision B
must stretch to compensate for plastic deformation, the hinge undergoing tension as
well as bending.
23.8.1 Hinge Failure Modes

     Most hinge failures are caused by excessive loading of the part they are supporting.
Typical failure modes for a hinge are listed in Table 23-9. In the event of a spring
loaded hinge, see Chapter 4, Section 4.2 for specific failure modes of a mechanical
spring.

                            Table 23-9. Typical Failure Modes for a Hinge

     FAILURE MODE         FAILURE CAUSE            FAILURE EFFECT
Bent pin                                      Hinge Failure
Weak spring          Excessive loading        Hinge failure
Damaged plating      Shock loads              Eventual hinge failure
Noisy hinge          Corrosion                Eventual hinge failure
                     Contaminants, bent pin,
Jammed hinge         loss of lubrication      Hinge failure
                     Excessive loading,
                     damaged pin

23.8.2 Hinge Failure Rate

     The failure rate of a living hinge depends on whether strain in the hinge is purely
elastic or whether plastic strain is also present. Plastic strain is further divided into pure
bending strain and bending plus tensile strain. The design reliability of a hinge depends
on the type of stress it is expected to carry in service.

     The failure rate of both a metal hinge and a living hinge can be expected to be 0.5
failures per million cycles for normal applications. Chapter 18 provides equations and
procedures to evaluate a slider crank mechanism for reliability considering the operating
environment in determining the failure rate. Procedures for determining the failure rate
of a hinge spring are contained in Chapter 4.

23.9 KEYS AND PINS

     Keys and pins are used on shafts to secure rotating elements such as gears and
pulleys. Keys are used to enable the transmission of torque from shaft to the gear,
pulley or other shaft supported element. Pins are used for axial positioning and for
transfer of torque and/or thrust. Typical types of pins include cotter pins, dowel pins,

Miscellaneous Parts  23-12                    Revision B
hitch pins, taper pins and roll pins. The Woodruff key is often used to position a wheel
against a shaft shoulder.

23.9.1 Key and Pin Failure Modes

     Typical failure modes to be considered in the evaluation of reliability for keys and
pins are included in the following table.

                       Table 23-10. Typical Failure Modes for Keys and Pins

     FAILURE MODE         FAILURE CAUSE            FAILURE EFFECT

Sheared pin or key   Loose part on shaft      Damage to higher indenture
Loose pin or key     Enlarged holes           level component
Damaged pin          Shock/ vibration         Loose part on shaft
Damaged keyway       Excessive axial loading  Misalignment of part
                                              Axial movement of mounted
                                              part

23.9.2 Key and Pin Failure Rate

     Pins are subject to loading in shear. Fatigue failure begins with a small crack.
Stress concentration factors for keyways depend on the fillet radius at the bottom and
ends of the keyway. Published failure rates for keys and pins indicate a failure rate for
keys and pins of 0.35 failures/million hours.

23.10 PILLOW BLOCK

     Pillow blocks are comprised of a bearing mounted in a housing and typically used to
provide load support for a rotating shaft. In many belt drive systems the drive
mechanism that couples the motor to a fan or blower is retained by pillow block
bearings. Chapter 7 provides guidance on evaluating the bearing for reliability. As with
most bearings, pillow block bearings are specified in terms of L10 life and the procedures
in Chapter 7 can be used to modify the L10 life for the intended pillow block application.

23.10.1 Pillow Block Failure Modes

     Pillow blocks are used to support a shaft, the mounting surface being on a parallel
plane with the axis of the shaft. Elongated bolt holes in the base of the unit allow for

Miscellaneous Parts                 23-13     Revision B
some adjustment of the pillow block. Therefore correct assembly of the pillow block is
critical to achieving the expected life expectancy of the pillow block. A pillow block
mounted at an angle with respect to the shaft can cause scoring of the shaft, heat build
up and early seal leakage. The housing material for a pillow block bearing is typically
made of cast iron or pressed steel and failures of the housing itself are almost
nonexistent. Typical failure modes are listed in the following table.

Table 23.11. Typical Failure Modes for a Pillow Block

     FAILURE MODE     FAILURE CAUSE                 FAILURE EFFECT
Worn bearing race
                      Excessive side loading,       Shaft vibration
Bearing seizure       misalignment,

Loss of lubricant     Loss of lubricant, excessive
Damaged housing
Loose shaft coupling  rotational velocity, high     Shaft seizure

                      temperature

                      Seal leakage                  Bearing wear

                      Shock, vibration              Damaged pillow block

                      Loose set screw               Early shaft wear

     See Chapter 7, Section 7.4 for specific bearing failure modes. See Chapter 3,
Section 3.2 for specific seal failure modes. See Section 23.13 later in this Chapter on
set screws for specific set screw failure modes.

23.10.2 Pillow Block Failure Rate

     Although the pillow block is comprised of a standard bearing and a housing, the
effect of a misaligned pillow block on the shaft must be considered in evaluating a pillow
block for reliability. Typically, a pillow block will experience a failure rate of 5.0 failures
per million revolutions. The L10 life of the pillow block may need to be adjusted after
considering the potential failure modes.

23.11 POWER SCREWS

     A power screw is a mechanical device for translating rotational motion to linear
motion. Typical applications include the screw for jacks, presses and vises.

     The wear life of a power screw is difficult to predict because of the number of
variables to consider including load, speed, screw material, surface finish, lubrication,
duty cycle, operating temperature, and environmental factors such as vibration and the

Miscellaneous Parts                23-14                           Revision B
existence of abrasive and corrosive contaminants. Power screws are subject to both
adhesive and abrasive wear. These wear mechanisms are described in Chapter 9.
Also, Chapter 16, Section 16.3 provides the equations and procedures for evaluating
the stress-strength aspects of a power screw.

     Ball screws are a type of power screw. Ball screws allow balls to roll between the
screw shaft and nut to achieve high efficiency. Manufacturers usually report the rated
load that a given ball screw can exert for 1 million inches of cumulative travel. This is a
similar rating method as for the L10 life of ball bearings and the same relationship can be
used to estimate the life of the particular power screw:

                     PS     =    LA  3                     (23-1)
                     PS ,B       LS  
                                     

where:

           PS = Failure rate of power screw, failures/million hours
         PS,B = Base failure rate of power screw from published life, failures/million

                     hours

           LA = Equivalent radial load, lbs
           LS = Basic dynamic load rating, lbs

     This concept of estimating the life of a part with respect to loading is explained in
Chapter 7.

23.11.1 Power Screw Failure Modes

     The nuts of a power screw system used for moving loads such as in the lead screw
of a lathe are usually made of a softer material than that of the screw. This process
eliminates the potential problem of material bonding and galling under load pressure if
the same materials were to be used. Also, the nut is cheaper than the drive screw thus
reducing maintenance costs. The failure rate of the nut can therefore be expected to
have a higher failure rate than the screw. For applications that position and support
heavy loads such as scaffolding, like materials are sometimes used.

     Another failure mode to consider is wear. Plating of a power screw is an important
design feature because of the stiction involved under load. The first level of wear on a
plated part will be the plating itself. Once the plating has worn away, bare metal is
exposed to the environment. For moving load applications, proper lubrication is
important to achieve maximum service life. Typical failure modes for a lead screw are
listed in Table 23.12.

Miscellaneous Parts                     23-15  Revision B
Table 23.12. Typical Failure Modes for a Power Screw

     FAILURE MODE         FAILURE CAUSE                FAILURE EFFECT
Screw bonded to nut  Loss of lubrication
Scored screw shaft   Excessive load pressure      Load can not be moved
Fractured nut
Worn screw threads   Misalignment                 Eventual power screw
                                                  failure
                     Excessive Pressure-          Failed power screw
                     Velocity                     operation
                     Foreign contaminants,        Unstable power screw
                     loading                      operation

23.11.2 Power Screw Failure Rate

     The number of variables as described previously affecting the failure rate of a drive
screw make it extremely difficult to predict. Without some personal experience with the
design of the power screw in its intended operating environment, it is normally best to
evaluate the individual parts of the power screw using the procedures in Chapters 9 and
16.

23.12 RIVET

     There are two common types of rivets, lap-joint and butt-joint. In a lap-joint rivet the
plates to be joined overlap each other and are held together by one or more rows of
rivets. In the butt-joint, the plates to be joined are in the same plane and are joined
together with a cover plate which is riveted to both plates by one or more rows of rivets.
Factors to be considered in evaluating a riveted joint for reliability include type of joint,
spacing of rivets, type and size of rivets, hole-size and rivet material.

     Both lap-joint and butt-joint rivet assemblies are subject to shear, tension, and
crushing.

The shearing stress in the rivet will be:

                     SS  =  P                               (23-2)
                            AS
                                                  Revision B
Miscellaneous Parts                        23-16
where:               SS = Shearing stress, lb/in2
                      P = Tensile load on the joint, lbs
                     AS = Shear area, in2

The controlling tensile stress in the plate occurs near the rivet hole:

                     ST  =      P                                                    (23-3)
                            (w - d)t

where:                   ST = Tensile stress, lb/in2
                         w = Width of the plate, in
                         d = Hole diameter, in
                          t = Plate thickness, in

The crushing stress due to load transfer at the contact between plate and rivet is:

                     SC  =  P                                                        (23-4)
                            td

where:               SC = Crushing stress level at the area of the rivet, lb/in2

     The total design will include a sufficient number of rivets to ensure that the failure of
any one rivet because of improper installation or damage will not result in immediate
failure of the structure.

23.12.1 Rivet Failure Modes

     The primary failure modes in a conventional riveted joint assembly are rivet shear
and plate cracking due to load bearing in the sheet. In lower stress aluminum
structures, failure is more frequent in the plate, the failure mode being tension cracks
starting at stress concentrations on hole-surfaces. In higher stress applications, the
failure mode may be either shear of the rivets or plate cracking.

Rivets may fail by:
· Shearing through a cross section of the rivet

Miscellaneous Parts                   23-17                              Revision B
    · Crushing

     Plates may fail by:
    · Tearing along a single line from center of rivet hole to edge of plate
    · Shearing along two parallel lines extending from opposite sides of the

         rivet hole to the edge of the plate
    · Tearing between adjacent rivets
    · Tensile failure of the plate
    · Crushing

23.12.2 Rivet Failure Rate

     Riveted structures designed in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and
assembled without additional stress raisers can be expected to have a fatigue failure
rate of 0.08 failures per million hours. Both the method of making the hole for the rivet
and the presence of a countersink affect the fatigue strength. For example, for single-
row joints, fatigue strength increases with decreasing pitch; for three-row joints, fatigue
strength increases with increasing spacing; and for multi-row joints, fatigue strength
increases with increasing numbers of rows. In evaluating rivet joint designs for reliability
it is important to recognize the fact that slightly out-of-round holes can increase the
failure rate by a factor of 10. Assurance of rivet assembly reliability is normally assured
by trial and error experimentation on sample products.

23.13 SETSCREW

     Setscrews are special fasteners designed to hold gears and pulleys on shafts.
Unlike bolts and tap screws that depend on tension to develop a clamping force, the
setscrew depends on compression to develop a clamping force. The resistance to axial
or rotary motion of the collar or hub relative to the shaft is called the holding power.
This holding power is a frictional resistance between the contact surfaces of the collar
and shaft plus the penetration of the setscrew into the shaft. The primary failure mode
of the setscrew-shaft combination is a loose setscrew and loss of holding power. Of
particular importance to the failure rate of the setscrew is the size of the setscrew and
the holding power provided by the clamping action. Holding power is generally
specified as the tangential force in pounds. The size of the shaft to be used with a
particular size of setscrew will determine the holding power required. Cup-point and
cone-point setscrews for example, penetrate the shaft deeper than oval-point or flat-
point setscrews.

     Setscrew selection is usually based on the setscrew diameter being equal to
approximately one-half the shaft diameter. Manufacturer's data provide more exact
design criteria. The shape of the screw head affects the seating torque that can be

Miscellaneous Parts  23-18  Revision B
attained because it determines how much torque can be transmitted to the screw. For
example, less torque can be transmitted through a slotted setscrew than a socket head
setscrew. The holding power of the slotted setscrew is about 45% less than that of the
socket head setscrew.

     When a setscrew is used in combination with a key, the screw diameter should be
equal to the width of the key. In this combination, the setscrew holds the parts in an
axial direction only. Torsional load on the parts is then carried by the key. The key
should be tight fitting so that no motion is transmitted to the screw. Under high
reversing or alternating loads, a poorly fitted key will cause the screw to back out and
lose its clamping force.

23.13.1 Setscrew Failure Modes

     An important consideration in evaluating a setscrew-shaft combination is the holding
power provided by the clamping action. Holding power is generally specified as the
tangential force in pounds, the resistance to axial or rotary motion of the collar or hub
relative to the shaft. Total reliability of the setscrew-shaft combination is also dependent
on the number of setscrews being used. Two setscrews give more holding power than
one, but not necessarily twice as much. Holding power is approximately doubled when
the second setscrew is installed in an axial line with the first but is only about 30%
greater when the screws are diametrically opposed. Normally a displacement of 60
degrees is used when two setscrews need to be installed on the same circumferential
line providing a holding power of 1.75 times the holding power of one setscrew.

     Another failure mode to be considered in the setscrew-shaft combination is
corrosion created by dissimilar materials. A thin film of rust-preventive oil is normally
used to protect unplated setscrews, or cadmium or zinc plated setscrews can be used.
A summary of failure modes for setscrews is shown in the following table.

                         Table 23.13. Typical Failure Modes for a Setscrew

     FAILURE MODE    FAILURE CAUSE                          FAILURE EFFECT
                                                           Loss of shaft motion
Axial motion of collar or - Shock and vibration resulting

hub                  in loose setscrew

Rotary motion of collar - Shock and vibration resulting

or hub               in loose setscrew

Damaged setscrew     - Incorrect torque at installation

                     - Severe operating environment
                     resulting in corroded setscrew

Miscellaneous Parts  23-19                                 Revision B
23.13.2 Setscrew Failure Rate

     Setscrews are subject to axial and rotational loading in shear. Published failure
rates for setscrews are in the range of 0.35 failures/million hours. Table 23.14 provides
some recommended multiplying factors to adjust the base failure rate for the intended
operating environment.

                Table 23.14. Service Factor Multiplying Factors for a Setscrew

  OPERATING ENVIRONMENT         LOW HUMIDITY                 HIGH HUMIDITY
Normal duty                              1.0                          1.2
Random shock and vibration               1.2                          1.4
Continuous shock and vibration           1.5                          1.8

23.14 WIRE ROPE

     A typical wire rope contains wire twisted in one direction to form the strands, and
the strands twisted in the opposite direction to form the rope. In the completed rope the
visible wires are approximately parallel to the axis of the rope. In another wire rope
design the wires in the strand and the strands in the rope are twisted in the same
direction so that the outer wires run diagonally across the axis of the rope. This wire
rope design provides more resistance to abrasive wear and failure to fatigue but is
harder to handle and more likely to kink and untwist.

     When a loaded rope is bent over a sheave, the rope stretches like a string, rubs
against the sheave, and causes wear of both the rope and the sheave. The amount of
wear that occurs depends upon the pressure of the rope in the sheave groove. This
pressure is called the bearing pressure given by:

                     p = 2F                                                 (23-5)
                          dD

where:

                     p = Bearing pressure, pounds
                     F = Tensile force on the rope, lbs/in2

Miscellaneous Parts             23-20                        Revision B
                    d = Rope diameter, inches

                   D = Sheave diameter, inches

     The optimum wire rope for a specific application is a difficult challenge because a
high rating in one design parameter generally means a lower rating in another
parameter. These design parameters include:

    · Strength-resistance to breaking - the total load to be considered includes those
         loads created by abrupt starts and stops and shock loads in addition to the dead
         weight.

    · Resistance to bending fatigue - the sharper the bend, the higher is the probability
         of fatigue failure. Accelerating the rate of travel also increases the fatigue factor.
         Close-coupled reverse bending will further increase the probability of fatigue
         failure. The greater the number of wires in each strand, the greater the
         resistance of rope to bending fatigue.

    · Resistance to vibrational fatigue - vibration in the system is transmitted through
         the wire rope in the form of shock waves. This energy is absorbed by the various
         components and can eventually lead to wire failure in the rope.

    · Resistance to abrasion - abrasion can occur on drums, sheaves or whenever
         rope rubs against itself or other material. Abrasion occurs internally whenever
         rope rubs against itself or other material. Abrasion also occurs internally
         whenever wire rope is loaded or bent and it weakens the rope by wearing away
         metal from inside and outside wires. Excessive wear can be caused by faulty
         sheave alignment, incorrect groove diameters, or improper drum winding.

    · Resistance to crushing - crushing is the effect of external pressure on a rope,
         which damages it by distorting the cross-section shape of the rope, its strands
         and/or the core. When a rope is damaged by crushing, the wire, strands and
         core are prevented from moving and adjusting as required during operation.
         Crushing resistance is the ability to resist and absorb external forces.

23.14.1 Wire Rope Failure Modes

     The main issue with the reliability of a wire rope is safety, since a failure of a wire
rope can result in catastrophic consequences. The rated capacity of a wire rope is load
which a new wire rope may handle under given operating conditions and at an assumed
design factor. A design factor of 5 is typical for a wire rope (operating loads not to
exceed 20% of the catalog breaking strength). Operating loads need to be reduced
when life or valuable property are at risk. A design factor of 10 is usually chosen when
wire rope is used to carry personnel (operating loads not to exceed 10 % of catalog
breaking strength). The wire rope design must also be reviewed to assure that wire

Miscellaneous Parts              23-21  Revision B
rope attachments have the same working load limit as the wire rope being used.
Typical failure modes of a wire rope assembly are listed in Table 23.15.

                     Table 23.15. Typical Failure Modes for a Wire Rope

     FAILURE MODE         FAILURE CAUSE                 FAILURE EFFECT
Breakage             Abrupt starts, sudden stops   Loss of load
Fatigue failure      exceeding dead weight load
                     Sharp bending around          Loss of load
Wire crushing        sheave, vibrational fatigue,
Damaged rope         installation error, loss of   Strands and core do not
                     lubricant                     adjust resulting in
                                                   erratic movement
                     External forces               Excessive wear, early
                                                   failure
                     Faulty sheave alignment

23.14.2 Wire Rope Failure Rate

     Wire rope manufacturers provide a fatigue diagram for their products similar to an
S-N diagram. Assuming the ultimate tensile strength of the wire material is selected for
the application including published safety factors, the wire rope can be expected to have
a failure rate of approximately 17.5 failures per million operations.

23.15 REFERENCES

     In addition to specific references cited throughout Chapter 23, other references
included below are recommended in support of performing a reliability analysis of
miscellaneous parts.

19. Hindhede, U., et al, Machine Design Fundamentals, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1983.

39. Shigley, J.E., Mischke, C.R., Mechanical Engineering Design, McGraw-Hill Book
      Co., NY, 1989.

88. Reliability Analysis Center, "Nonelectronic Parts Reliability Data", NPRD-95

93. Mechanical Engineers Handbook, Myer Kutz, et al, John Wiley & Sons, 1986

Miscellaneous Parts  23-22                                               Revision B
94. Mechanical Designers' Workbook, "Fastening, Joining & Connecting", J. Shigley
and C. Mischke, McGraw-Hill 1986

95. Mechanical Designers' Workbook, "Mechanisms", J. Shigley and C. Mischke,
McGraw-Hill 1986

96. Mechanical Designers' Workbook, "Power Transmission Elements", J. Shigley and
C. Mischke, McGraw-Hill 1986

97. B. Demeulenaere and J. Schutter , "Input Torque Balancing Using an Inverted Cam
Mechanism", ASME, 2005

100. Fittings and Flanges, Hydraulics & Pneumatics magazine,

101. John H. Bickford, "An Introduction to the Design and Behavior of Bolted Joints",
Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1990

105. OREDA Offshore Reliability Data, 5th Edition Det Norske Veritas, N-1363 Hovik,
       Norway 2009 ISBN 978-82-14-04830-8

Miscellaneous Parts  23-23  Revision B
                     This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Miscellaneous Parts  23-24                               Revision B
                    24 CHAPTER

                                      DESIGN ANALYSIS OF
                               EQUIPMENT AVAILABILITY

25.0 TABLE OF CONTENTS

     24.1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 1
     24.2 RMA planning .................................................................................................. 2

        24.2.1 Worksheet Formats ................................................................................... 3
        24.2.2 Ground Rules and Assumptions................................................................ 3
        24.2.3 Indenture Level.......................................................................................... 3
        24.2.4 Coding System .......................................................................................... 3
        24.2.5 Failure Definition ....................................................................................... 4
     24.3 GENERAL PROCEDURE................................................................................ 4
        24.3.1 System Definition ...................................................................................... 4
        24.3.2 RMA Process ............................................................................................ 5
        24.3.3 Severity Classification ............................................................................... 6
     24.4 RMA ANALYSIS PROCEDURE....................................................................... 6
        24.4.1 Analysis Purpose and Approach ............................................................... 6
        24.4.2 System Definition ...................................................................................... 7
        24.4.3 RMA Analysis worksheet........................................................................... 8
     24.5 REFERENCES .............................................................................................. 15
     24.6 WORKSHEET EXAMPLES ........................................................................... 16

24.1 INTRODUCTION

     The normal procedure for evaluating equipment reliability and maintainability is the
Failure Mode, Effects, and Criticality Analysis (FMECA). The FMECA identifies the
failure modes for each component of the system and the effects of these failure modes
are then identified through the next higher assembly up to the system level. The
severity and the occurrence probability of the failure mode are then determined. The
maintenance philosophy of the equipment and procedures for maintaining the
equipment are normally established using a Reliability Centered Maintenance (RCM)
analysis. Fault paths of equipment performance are identified using a Fault Tree
Analysis (FTA) so that any potential hazards or system level faults can be corrected
through equipment redesign early in the design phase.

RMA  24-1  Revision A
     The FMECA, FTA and RCM are normally performed as individual analysis efforts
and the total effort is an extremely time consuming process. The contribution of these
analysis procedures is questionable. They are normally a contractual requirement
rather than being applied as a design tool. As a result, the process is not begun during
the early stages of design development and by the time all of the analyses are
completed, the effect on design improvement is negligible. Other common shortcomings
include the failure to consider the effect of system operating conditions at the
component level, failure to properly investigate the internal features of mechanical
components, and failure to consider the interaction of mechanical assemblies. The
isolated performance of the analysis efforts results in inadequate inputs to the design
process with ineffective results in reliability enhancement.

     The Reliability, Maintainability and Availability (RMA) analysis procedure contained
in this Chapter is designed to streamline the analysis process permitting effective
contribution to product reliability. The RMA evaluates a design as to its projected
performance considering Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF), Mean Time To Repair
(MTTR) and Operational Availability (AO). With this RMA procedure, the process can be
completed using one single worksheet rather than completing the FMECA, FTA and
RCM procedures individually. The RMA procedure outlined in this chapter is designed
to be used in conjunction with other Handbook chapters that identify failure modes and
effects and determine their probabilities of occurrence.

24.2 RMA PLANNING

     The usefulness of the RMA as a design tool and in the decision making process is
dependent upon the effectiveness with which problem information is communicated for
early design attention. To be effective, the RMA must be iterative to correspond with
the nature of the design process itself. The extent of effort and sophistication of
approach used in the RMA will be dependent upon the nature and requirements of the
individual program. This makes it necessary to tailor the RMA to each individual
development program. Tailoring requires extensive planning so that regardless of the
degree of sophistication, the RMA will contribute meaningfully to program decisions
regarding the feasibility and adequacy of a design approach.

     Planning the RCM task involves system description development, worksheet
design, procedure implementation, worksheet modifications to reflect design changes,
and results analysis to provide design guidance. Establishing ground rules for
conducting the analyses, identifying the lowest indenture level of analysis, identifying a
coding system, and defining system failures all need to be considered in RMA analysis
planning. Planning the RMA analysis effort will prevent the duplication of efforts within
the same development program.

     Timeliness is another important factor in assuring effective implementation of the
RMA analysis. While the objective of the RMA is to identify all modes of failure within a
system design, its first purpose is the early identification of all catastrophic and critical
failure possibilities so they can be eliminated or minimized through design correction at

RMA  24-2  Revision A
the earliest possible time. Therefore, the RMA should be initiated as soon as
preliminary design information is available at the higher system levels and extended to
the lower levels as more information becomes available on the items in question.

     Although the RMA is an essential reliability task, it also provides information for
other purposes. The RMA is used for assurance of system maintainability, safety,
survivability, and efficient logistics support.

24.2.1 Worksheet Formats

     RMA worksheets that organize and document the analysis need to be designed to
optimize understanding of failure modes and effects at all indenture levels of the
system. A description of worksheet entries is included in Section 24.4.3 and worksheet
examples are included in Section 24.6. It is important that these examples be modified
for the particular system being analyzed.

24.2.2 Ground Rules and Assumptions

     Ground rules identify the RMA analysis approach to be used including hardware
analysis, functional analysis or combination analysis (see Section 24.4.1), the lowest
indenture level to be analyzed and general statements of what constitutes a failure of
the equipment in terms of performance criteria and allowable limits. Every effort should
be made to identify and record all ground rules and analysis assumptions prior to
initiation of the analysis. These ground rules provide a consistent approach when
completing the worksheets. It must be recognized that ground rules and analysis
assumptions may need to be altered for any item if design requirements are modified.

24.2.3 Indenture Level

         The indenture level applies to the system hardware or functional level at which
failures are postulated. The lowest indenture level of analysis is usually established at
the lowest replaceable assembly of the system such as an actuator, valve or pump.
The objective is to identify the failure modes of all parts that can contribute to an
equipment failure such as an O-ring or spring. Failure modes at this level are normally
included at the replaceable part level. Examples are included in the worksheets in
Section 24.6.

24.2.4 Coding System

     A coding system is established for consistent identification of system functions and
equipment and for tracking failure modes. If a functional block diagram is available for
the system, the coding system of that diagram should be used for the worksheets. Any
coding system based upon the hardware breakdown structure can be used that
provides complete visibility of each failure mode. The same coding system must be
used for all worksheets to permit tracking of the failure modes.

RMA  24-3  Revision A
24.2.5 Failure Definition

     General statements of what constitutes an equipment failure of the item in terms of
performance parameters and allowable limits for each specified output needs to be
established. Failure definitions need to consider the equipment operating environment
as well as design parameter limits.

24.3 GENERAL PROCEDURE

     The RMA systematically examines the equipment to the lowest established
indenture level and identifies all potential failure modes up to the total system level. In
the early stages of design when system definitions and functional descriptions are not
available, the initial analysis is performed to the lowest possible indenture level. When
system definitions and functional definitions become available, the analysis is extended
to the lowest established indenture level.

24.3.1 System Definition

     System definition requires a review of all descriptive information available on the
system to be analyzed. The following is representative of the information and data
required for system definition and analysis.

· Technical Specifications and Development Plans - Technical specifications and
development plans generally describe what constitutes and contributes to the various
types of system failure. These will state the system objectives and specify the design
and test requirements for operation, reliability, and maintainability. Detailed information
in the plans will provide operational and functional block diagrams showing the overall
functions the system must perform for successful operation. Time diagrams and charts
used to describe system functional sequence will aid in determining the time-stress as
well as feasibility of various means of failure detection and correction in the operating
system. Acceptable performance limits under specified operating and environmental
conditions are developed for the system and equipments.

     Mission and environmental profiles describe equipment performance requirements
in terms of functions and tasks to be performed related to the anticipated environments
for each mission phase and operating mode. Function-time relationships from the time-
stress relationships of the environmental conditions can then be established. A
definition of the operational and environmental stresses the system is expected to
undergo, as well as failure definitions, must be developed for an effective RMA analysis.

· Trade-off Study Reports - These reports, if available, help to identify areas of
marginal and state-of-the-art design and explain any design compromises and operating
restraints. This information will aid in determining the possible and most probable failure
modes and related causes in the system.

RMA  24-4  Revision A
· Design Data and Drawings - Design data and drawings identify each item and the
item configuration that perform each of the system functions. System design data and
drawings will usually describe internal and interface functions of the system beginning at
system level and progressing to the lowest indenture level of the system. Design data
will usually include either functional block diagrams or schematics that will facilitate
construction of reliability block diagrams.

· Reliability Data - The determination of the possible and probable failure modes
requires an analysis of reliability data on the item selected to perform each of the
system internal functions. It is always desirable to use reliability data resulting from
reliability tests run on the specific equipment to be used with the tests performed under
the identical conditions of use. When such test data are not available, procedures in this
Handbook can be used to estimate the reliability of the part for the intended operating
environment. Reliability data from MIL-HDBK-217 for electronic parts or from
operational experience and tests performed under similar use conditions on items
similar to those in the systems can be used.

24.3.2 RMA Process

     The RMA is most effective if initiated as an integral part of the early design process
and updated to reflect design changes. This process will prove beneficial at design
review meetings. The RMA will also be useful in defining special test considerations,
quality inspection points, preventive maintenance actions, operational constraints,
useful life, and other pertinent information and activities necessary to minimize failure
risk. The following discrete steps are used in performing the RMA:

     a. Define the system to be analyzed. Complete system definition includes
identification of internal and interface functions, expected performance at all indenture
levels, system restraints, and failure definitions. Functional narratives of the system
should include descriptions of each mission in terms of functions which identify tasks to
be performed for each mission phase and operational mode. Narratives should describe
the environmental profiles, expected mission times and equipment utilization, and the
functions and outputs of each item.

     b. Construct block diagrams. Functional and reliability block diagrams which
illustrate the operation, interrelationships, and interdependencies of functional entities
should be obtained or constructed for each item configuration involved in the system's
use. All potential item and interface failure modes are identified and their effect on the
immediate function or item and on the system defined. Each failure mode in terms of
the worst potential consequences which may result is identified and a severity
classification category assigned.

RMA  24-5  Revision A
     c. Identify failure detection methods and compensating provisions for each failure
mode. Corrective design or other actions required to eliminate the failure or control the
risk can be identified for design review and corrective action.

     d. Identify effects of corrective actions or other system attributes, such as
requirements for logistics support. Document the analysis and summarize the problems
which could not be corrected by design and identify the special controls which are
necessary to reduce failure risk.

24.3.3 Severity Classification
     Severity classifications are assigned to provide a qualitative measure of the worst

potential consequences resulting from item failure. A severity classification is assigned
to each identified failure mode and each item analyzed in accordance with the severity
classification categories defined as follows:

     Category I - Catastrophic - A failure which may cause death or total system loss

     Category II - Critical - A failure which may cause severe injury, extensive property
damage, or major system damage that results in loss of mission *

     Category III - Marginal - A failure which may cause minor injury, minor property
damage, or minor system damage that results in mission delay or degradation.

     Category IV - Minor - A failure not serious enough to cause injury, property damage
or mission delay or degradation, but which will necessitate repairs at a later time.

     * In some cases the loss of mission may be sufficiently severe so that it may be
classified as a Category I failure.

24.4 RMA ANALYSIS PROCEDURE

24.4.1 Analysis Purpose and Approach

     The purpose of the RMA is to study the effects of item failure on system operation
and to classify each potential failure according to its severity. Variations in design
complexity and available data will generally dictate the analysis approach to be used.
There are two primary approaches for accomplishing an RMA. One is the hardware
approach which lists individual hardware items and analyzes their possible failure
modes. The other is the functional approach which recognizes that every item is
designed to perform a number of functions that can be classified as outputs. The
outputs are listed and the failure modes that can contribute to an unsuccessful output
are analyzed. For complex systems, a combination of the functional and hardware
approaches may be considered. The RMA may be performed as a hardware analysis, a
functional analysis, or a combination analysis and may be initiated at either the highest

RMA  24-6  Revision A
indenture level and proceed through decreasing indenture levels (top-down approach)
or at the part or assembly level and proceed through increasing indenture levels
(bottom-up approach) until the RMA for the system is complete.

     The functional approach is normally used when hardware items cannot be uniquely
identified or when system complexity requires analysis from the initial indenture level
downward through succeeding indenture levels. The functional approach is normally
utilized in an initial indenture level down fashion (top-down approach); however, it can
be initiated at any level of indenture and progress in either direction. Each identified
failure mode is assigned a severity classification that is utilized during design to
establish priorities for corrective actions.

     The hardware (bottom-up) approach is normally used when hardware items can be
uniquely identified from schematics, drawings, and other engineering and design data.
The hardware approach is normally utilized in a part level up fashion (bottom-up
approach); however, it can be initiated at any level of indenture and progress in either
direction. Each identified failure mode is assigned a severity classification which will be
utilized during design to establish priorities for corrective actions.

     The procedures contained in this Handbook assume a bottom-up hardware
approach. This approach combined with the procedures in the Handbook for estimating
the failure rates of hardware items in their intended operating environments provides the
optimum method of performing an RMA analysis. After the failure modes are identified
for each hardware item, the probability of occurrence is determined and then severity
classifications are assigned to each failure mode and each item to provide a basis for
establishing corrective action priorities. First priority is given to the elimination of
identified Category I (catastrophic) and Category II (critical) failure modes. The
combination of failure mode probability of occurrence and severity category permits a
criticality rating of failure modes requiring additional investigation as to corrective action
requirements.

24.4.2 System Definition

     The first step in performing the RMA analysis is to define the system to be
analyzed. Functional narratives are developed for each mission, mission phase, and
operational mode and include statements of primary and secondary mission objectives.
The narratives include system and part descriptions, operational modes, expected
mission times and equipment utilization, and conditions which constitute system and
part failure. Developing a system definition is extremely beneficial when completing the
RMA analysis worksheets providing continuity at the lower indenture levels. The
system definition is also important during design reviews when failure mode criticality is
evaluated with respect to equipment performance and mission requirements. The
following paragraphs describe those subjects that comprise a system definition.

· Mission Functions and Operational Modes - The system definition includes
descriptions of each mission in terms of functions which identify the task to be

RMA  24-7  Revision A
performed and the functional mode of operation for performing the specific function.
Mission functions and operational modes are identified starting at the highest system
level and progressing to the lowest indenture level to be analyzed.

· Environmental Profiles - Environmental profiles include the anticipated
environmental conditions for each mission and mission phase. When a system is to be
utilized in more than one environment each different environmental profile needs to be
described. The intended use of the system and its equipments are developed from
mission time statements for each environmental profile. These profiles will be used in
determining the time-stress relationships and the feasibility of failure detection methods
and compensating provisions in the operating system.

· Mission Time - A quantitative statement of system function time requirements is
developed and included in the system definition. Function-time requirements are
developed for items which operate in different operational modes during different
mission phases and for items which function only if required.

· Block Diagrams - Block diagrams which illustrate the operation, interrelationships,
and interdependencies of functional entities of a system are advisable to provide the
ability for tracing failure mode effects through all levels of indenture. Functional and
reliability block diagrams show the functional flow sequence and the series dependence
or independence of functions and operations. Block diagrams can be constructed in
conjunction with or after defining the system and display the system as a breakdown of
its major functions. More than one block diagram will usually be required to display
alternative modes of operation, depending upon the definition established for the
system. All inputs and outputs of the item as a whole are shown on the diagram.

     Each block on the diagram should be designated by a consistent and logical item
number that reflects the functional system breakdown order. A uniform numbering
system developed in functional system breakdown order is required to provide
traceability and tracking through all levels of indenture.

     A functional block diagram illustrates the operation and interrelationships between
functional entities of a system as defined in engineering data and schematics. A
functional system block diagram provides a functional flow sequence for each indenture
level of analysis. A reliability block diagram defines the series dependence or
independence of all functions of a system or functional group for each life-cycle event.
The reliability block diagram provides identification of function interdependencies for the
system.

24.4.3 RMA Analysis worksheet

     The documentation of the RMA analysis is the next step and is accomplished by
completing the columns of the established RMA worksheet. Guidelines for designing
the worksheets are included in Section 24.2. Worksheet examples are included in

RMA  24-8  Revision A
Section 24.6. The following paragraphs contain a description of RMA worksheet
entries.

· Equipment Part Number ­ A part number for the component being analyzed is
assigned. The schematic diagram symbol or drawing number can be used to properly
identify the component.

· Equipment Functional Description - The name or nomenclature of the item or
system function being analyzed for failure mode and effects is listed. A uniform
identification code with general requirements is used to provide consistent identification
of system functions of the equipment and provide complete visibility of each failure
mode.

· Function ID Number - A sequential code number used to track worksheet entries,
provides a reference between worksheets and summary reports.

· Function - A concise statement of the function performed by the hardware item is
listed which includes both the inherent function of the part and its relationship to
interfacing items.

· Failure Mode ID Number ­ A sequential code number is assigned that will be used
to track individual failure modes. Only one failure mode should be referenced by the
Failure Mode ID number. The sequence of numbers resumes for each Function ID
Number.

· Failure Modes and Causes - All predictable failure modes for each indenture level
analyzed are identified and described. Potential failure modes are determined by
examination of item outputs and functional outputs identified in applicable block
diagrams and schematics. Failure modes of individual item functions are postulated on
the basis of narratives and failure definitions included in the ground rules. The most
probable causes associated with the postulated failure mode are identified and
described. Failure Mode Tables in the various chapters of this Handbook provide
listings of possible failure modes for the various mechanical components.

    Since the failure mode may have more than one cause, all probable independent
causes for each failure mode are identified in the indenture levels per the indenture
level analysis. To assist in assuring that a complete analysis is performed, each failure
mode and output function is examined in relation to the following typical failure
conditions:

     a. Premature operation.

     b. Failure to operate at a prescribed time.

     c. Intermittent operation.

     d. Failure to cease operation at a prescribed time.

     e. Loss of output or failure during operation.

RMA  24-9  Revision A
f. Degraded output or operational capability.
g. Other unique failure conditions, as applicable, based upon given

   characteristics and operational requirements or constraints.

· Mission Phase or Operational Mode - A concise statement of the mission phase
and operational mode in which the failure occurs is entered on the worksheet. Where a
specific event or time can be defined from the system definition and mission profiles, the
most definitive timing information should also be entered for the assumed time of failure
occurrence.

· Failure Effects - The consequences of each assumed failure mode on item
operation, function, or status is identified, evaluated, and recorded on the worksheet.
Failure effects focus on the specific block diagram element which is affected by the
failure under consideration. The failure under consideration may impact several
indenture levels in addition to the indenture level under analysis; therefore local, next
higher level, and end effects need to be evaluated. Failure effects also consider the
mission objectives, maintenance requirements and personnel and system safety.

     Local effects concentrate specifically on the impact an assumed failure mode has
on the operation and function of the item in the indenture level under consideration. The
consequences of each postulated failure affecting the item are described along with any
second-order effects which result. The purpose of defining local effects is to provide a
basis for evaluating compensating provisions and for recommending corrective action. It
is possible for the local effect to be the failure mode itself.

     Next higher level effects concentrate on the impact an assumed failure has on the
operation and function of the items in the next higher indenture level above the
indenture level under consideration. The consequences of each postulated failure
affecting the next higher indenture level are described.

     End effects evaluate and define the total effect an assumed failure has on the
operation, function, or status of the uppermost system. The end effect described may be
the result of a double failure. For example, failure of a safety device may result in a
catastrophic end effect only in the event that both the prime function goes beyond limit
for which the safety device is set and the safety device fails. Those end effects resulting
from a double failure need to be indicated on the worksheets and can be detailed in the
Remarks column.

· Failure Detection Method - A description of the methods by which occurrence of
the failure mode is detected by the operator is recorded on the worksheet. The failure
detection method, such as a visual or audible warning device, automatic sensing
device, sensing instrumentation or other unique indication is identified.

     A description of indications which are evident to an operator that a system has
malfunctioned or failed, other than the identified warning devices, are recorded. Proper

RMA  24-10                                                           Revision A
correlation of a system malfunction or failure may require identification of normal
indications as well as abnormal indications. If no indication exists, identify if the
undetected failure will jeopardize the mission objectives or personnel safety. If the
undetected failure allows the system to remain in a safe state, a second failure situation
should be explored to determine whether or not an indication will be evident to the
operator. Indications to the operator should be described as follows:

     a. Normal. An indication that is evident to an operator when the system or
equipment is operating normally.

     b. Abnormal. An indication that is evident to an operator when the system has
malfunctioned or failed.

     c. Incorrect. An erroneous indication to an operator due to the malfunction or failure
of an indicator such as an instrument, sensing device or visual or audible warning
device

     A description of the most direct procedure that allows an operator to isolate the
malfunction or failure is recorded. An operator will know only the initial symptoms until
further specific action is taken such as performing a more detailed built-in-test (BIT) or
operational procedure. The failure being considered in the analysis may be of lesser
importance or likelihood than another failure that could produce the same symptoms
and this must be considered. Fault isolation procedures require a specific action or
series of actions by an operator, followed by a check or cross reference either to
instruments, control devices, circuit breakers, or combinations thereof. This procedure is
followed until a satisfactory course of action is determined.

 · Failure Restoration Method - The method by which the failure is repaired or other
 action to be taken in event the failure mode does occur is entered on the worksheet.
 Typical repairs include on-site adjustment or lubrication, recalibration or part
 replacement with a spare. Off-site repairs requiring extensive down-time need to be
 considered.

 · Time to Repair - The time to repair the identified failure mode is determined
 utilizing the maintenance strategy as described for the failure restoration method.
 Administrative delay time may be included either with the time to repair or as noted in
 the remarks column.

 · Remarks - Any pertinent remarks pertaining to and clarifying any other column in
 the worksheet line are noted in the Remarks column. This column is used to amplify
 and clarify the entries on this particular worksheet. Typical remarks include safety
 provisions in the design, special maintenance requirements, logistics support of
 repaired items and spare parts requirements. This entry also may include a notation
 of unusual conditions, failure effects of redundant items, recognition of particularly
 critical design features or any other remarks that amplify the line entry.

RMA  24-11  Revision A
     The purpose of determining the criticality of a failure mode is to rank each potential
failure mode identified according to the combined influence of severity classification and
its probability of occurrence based upon the best available data. As parts configuration
data and failure rate data become available, criticality numbers should be calculated
and incorporated in the analysis. The failure probability levels, when used, should be
modified as the system is better defined. There are failure rate data sources other than
this Handbook such as MIL-HDBK-217 for electronic parts, OREDA and NPRD.
Section 24.5, References, provides information on these sources. Calculation of a
criticality number for each failure mode and component part is accomplished by
completing the applicable columns of the worksheet.

· Failure Rate Data Source - The source of the failure rate data such as this
Handbook, reliability testing data, MIL-HDBK-217, OREDA or NPRD is recorded on the
worksheet. See Section 24.5 for identification of failure rate data sources.

· Base Failure Rate - The Base Failure Rate from the failure rate data source is
recorded on the worksheet. The base failure rate is typically the failure rate found in the
failure rate data source that must then be adjusted for the intended operating
environment.

· Adjustment Factors - The base failure rate from the failure rate data source may
need to be adjusted for the operating and environmental conditions of the equipment
being analyzed. Adjustment factors may be the multiplying factors as contained in the
various chapters of this Handbook, they may be the analyst's best judgment or it may
be that no adjustment factor is needed. For example, if testing data for the particular
part is being used, adjustment factors may not be applicable. Explanations can be
included in the Remarks column.

· Part Failure Rate - The part failure rate (p) as calculated using the procedures in
this Handbook or from the appropriate failure rate data source is entered on the
worksheet. Where appropriate, application factors, environmental factors, and other
factors as may be required are applied to the base failure rates (b) obtained from this
Handbooks or other reference material to adjust for differences in operating stresses.

· Failure Effect Probability -  values are the conditional probability that the failure
effect will result in the identified criticality classification, given that the failure mode
occurs. The  values represent the analyst's judgment as to the conditional probability
the loss will occur. Typical  values are as follows:

     Actual loss = 1.00
     Probable loss = >0.10 to <1.00
     Possible loss = >0.0 to 0.10
     No effect = 0.0

· Failure Mode Ratio - The fraction of the part failure rate () related to the particular
failure mode under consideration is evaluated by the analyst and recorded. The failure

RMA  24-12  Revision A
mode ratio is the probability expressed as a decimal fraction that the part or item will fail
in the identified mode. After all potential failure modes of a particular part or item are
listed, the sum of the  values for that part or item will equal one. Individual failure rate
multipliers may be derived from failure rate source data or from test and operational
data. If failure mode data are not available, the  values will represent the analyst's
judgment based upon analysis of the item's functions.

· Duty Cycle ­ In many cases the component being analyzed is only used part of the
time with respect to the total equipment operating time. Examples include a valve or an
actuator that is used only for a particular mode of equipment operation.

· Detectability - The probability that the failure will be detected by the operator in
event of component failure is determined based on the analyst's knowledge of the
system.

· Operating Time - The operating time in hours or the number of operating cycles of
the component per mission is derived from the system definition and listed on the
worksheet.

· Failure Mode Criticality Number - The value of the failure mode criticality number
(Cm) is calculated and listed on the worksheet. Cm is the portion of the criticality number
for the item due to one of its failure modes under a particular severity classification. For
a particular severity classification and operational phase, the Cm for a failure mode may
be calculated with the following equation:

where:  Cm = p   d t

        Cm = Criticality number for the failure mode
        p = Part Failure Rate

          = Conditional probability that failure mode results in listed end effect
          = Failure Mode Ratio
         d = Probability that the failure mode will be detected by the operator

                or other means such as an alarm or monitor
         t = Duration of applicable operating hours or mission

                phase (hours or cycles)

· Item Criticality Number - The second criticality number calculation is for the item
under analysis. Criticality numbers (Cr) for the items of the system are calculated and
listed on the worksheet. A criticality number for an item is the number of system failures
of a specific type expected due to the item's failure modes. The specific type of system
failure is expressed by the severity classification for the item's failure modes.

     For a particular severity classification and mission phase, the Cr for an item is the
sum of the failure mode criticality numbers.

RMA     24-13  Revision A
                                                    j

                Cr = (P   d t) n
                                                  n=1

     where:
             Cr = Criticality number for the item
               n = The failure modes in the item that fall under a particular criticality
                     classification
                j = Last failure mode in the item under the criticality classification

· Compensating Provisions - Compensating provisions, either design provisions or
operator actions, which circumvent or mitigate the effect of the failure are identified and
evaluated. This step is required to record the true behavior of the item in the presence
of an internal malfunction or failure.

     Compensating provisions which are features of the design at any indenture level
that will nullify the effects of a malfunction or failure are described on the worksheet.
These include control items that will halt generation or propagation of failure effects, or
activate backup or standby items or systems.

     Design compensating provisions include:
     a. Redundant items that allow continued and safe operation.
     b. Safety or relief devices such as monitoring or alarm provisions which

         permit effective operation or limits damage.
     c. Alternative modes of operation such as backup or standby items or systems.

     Compensating provisions which require operator action to circumvent or mitigate
the effect of the postulated failure need to be described. The compensating provision
that best satisfies the indication(s) observed by an operator when the failure occurs is
determined. This may require an investigation to determine the most correct operator
action(s). The consequences of any probable incorrect action(s) by the operator in
response to an abnormal indication should be considered and the effects recorded.

· Severity Classification - A severity classification category is assigned to each
failure mode and item according to the failure effect. The effect on the functional
condition of the item under analysis caused by the loss or degradation of output is
identified so the failure mode effects will be properly categorized. For lower levels of
indenture where effects on higher indenture levels are unknown, a failure's effect on the
indenture level under analysis is described by the severity classification categories as
follows:

     Category I - Catastrophic - A failure which may cause death or total system loss

     Category II - Critical - A failure which may cause severe injury, extensive property
damage, or major system damage that results in loss of mission *

RMA  24-14  Revision A
     Category III - Marginal - A failure which may cause minor injury, minor property
damage, or minor system damage that results in mission delay or degradation.

     Category IV - Minor - A failure not serious enough to cause injury, property damage
or mission delay or degradation, but which will necessitate repairs at a later time.

     * In some cases the loss of mission may be sufficiently severe so that it may be
classified as a Category I failure.

· Remarks - Any pertinent remarks pertaining to and clarifying any other column in
the worksheet line are noted in the Remarks column. Examples include a description
of the failure rate data source, adjustment factors and  or  factors.

    The Fault Tree Analysis is designed to assure the safety of equipment operation.
From previous worksheets, the end effects at the total system level are reviewed.
There will be many similar end effects that can be consolidated into the most critical
system level failure effects. These are listed on the worksheet (Sheet 5 of the example
worksheets) along with the previous worksheet reference numbers and occurrence
probabilities. If a fault tree diagram has been developed, the fault path reference is
listed. The method by which the system level failure effect is detected and repaired is
then entered. Completion of this worksheet provides assurance that all system level
failure modes have been considered with respect to reliability and logistics support.

    The criticality matrix provides a means of identifying and comparing each failure
mode to all other failure modes with respect to severity. The matrix is constructed by
inserting item or failure mode identification numbers in matrix locations representing the
severity classification category and the probability of occurrence. The resulting matrix
display shows the distribution of criticality of item failure modes and provides a tool for
assigning corrective action priorities. A sample Criticality Matrix is shown in Figure
24.1. The frequency of occurrence can be displayed as a probability of occurrence, as
a severity level or failure rate. The numbers within the blocks of Figure 24.1 represent
the identification numbers of individual failure modes. The resulting display indicates
the relative criticality of the failure modes.

24.5 REFERENCES

28. MIL-HDBK-217, "Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment".

88. Reliability Analysis Center, "Nonelectronic Parts Reliability Data", NPRD-95

105. OREDA Offshore Reliability Data, 4th Edition Det Norske Veritas, NO-1322 Hovik,
       Norway 2002, ISBN 8251500877

118. MIL-STD-1629, "Procedures for Performing a Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality
       Analysis", August 1998

RMA              24-15                                               Revision A
24.6 WORKSHEET EXAMPLES

     The following pages contain examples worksheets used for the RMA analysis. It is
important to note that these examples need to be modified for the system being
analyzed. The preceding Sections of this Chapter need to be reviewed thoroughly
before deciding on the Worksheet formats.

RMA  24-16  Revision A
RMA  24-17  Revision A
RMA  24-18  Revision A
RMA  24-19  Revision A
RMA  24-20  Revision A
RMA  24-21  Revision A
                I

                                   1A4A1

                II

Severity Level  III  1A5B2  2A1A5                    2A6A1
                            1A3A6
                IV   1A1A7  1B2B5                          B       1A2A8
                     1A3B2
                     2A1A1  1A5A2                                        A
                            1A3A9

                     E      D      C

                            Frequency of Occurrence

                            Figure 24.1 Sample Criticality Matrix

                RMA                24-22                                    Revision A
                  25 CHAPTER

                  REFERENCES

1. Abadzheva, R.N. et al., "Effects of Brake Fluid Components on Rubber," Khimiya i
      Tekhnologiya Topliv i Masel, No. 8, pp. 18-19 (Aug 1982).

2. "A Practical Guide to Compressor Technology", Second Edition, Heinz P. Bloch,
       John Wiley & Sons, 2006

3. Anderson, A.E., "Wear of Brake Materials," in: Wear Control Handbook, M.B.
      Peterson and W.O. Winer, Eds., pp. 843-857, Am. Soc. Mech. Eng., New York
      (1980).

4. Armstrong, E.L., W.R. Murphy and P.S. Wooding, "Evaluation of Water Accelerated
      Bearing Fatigue in Oil-Lubricated Ball Bearings," Lubrication Engineering, Vol. 34,
      No. 1, pp. 15-21 (1 Nov 1977).

5. Bauer, P., M. Glickmon, and F. Iwatsuki, "Analytical Techniques for the Design of
      Seals for Use in Rocket Propulsion Systems," Volume 1, ITT Research Institute,
      Technical Report AFRPL-TR-65-61 (May 1965).

6. Bayer R.G., A.T. Shalhey and A.R. Watson, "Designing for Zero Wear," Machine
      Design (9 January 1970).

7. Bishop, F.E. and William M. Needleman, "The Effects of Fluid Contamination on
      Component Wear," Pall Corporation.

8. Block, H. and D. Johnson, "Downtime Prompts Upgrading of Centrifugal Pumps,"
      Chemical Engineering Magazine, pp. 35-38 (25 Nov 1985).

9. Boone, Tony D., "Reliability Prediction Analysis for Mechanical Brake Systems,"
      NAVAIR-SYSCOM Report (Aug 1981).

10. "Boston Gear Catalog" Catalog 100, INCOM International Inc., Quincy,
      Massachusetts 02171.

References  25-1  Revision D
11. Canterbury, Jack, and James D. Lowther, "Application of Dimensional Analysis to
      the Prediction of Mechanical Reliability," Naval Weapons Support Activity,
      Washington Navy Yard, Wash., D.C., Report ADAD35295 (September 1976).

12. Carson, Harold, Springs: Troubleshooting and Failure Analysis, Marcel Dekker,
      Inc., New York. (1983).

13. Cormier, K.R., "Helicopter Drive System R&M Design Guide," Division of United
      Technologies Corp., Stanford, CT 06602, Report ADAD69835 (April 1979).

14. "Engineering Guide to Spring Design" Associated Spring, Barnes Group INc., Form
      No. 515 (1981).

15. "Fabrication and Testing of Lightweight Hydraulic System Simulator Hardware -
      Phase II," Report NADC-79024-60, prepared by Rockwell International, Columbus,
      Ohio, for Naval Air Systems Command, Washington, D.C.

16. Ferodo Limited, Friction Materials for Engineers, Stockport, England (1969).

17. Field, G.J., "Seals That Survive Heat," Machine Design (1 May 1975).

18. Hauser, D.L. et al., "Hardness Tester for Polyur," NASA Tech Briefs, Vol. 11, No. 6,
      p. 57 (1987).

19. Hindhede, U., et al, Machine Design Fundamentals, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1983.

20. Ho, T.L., F.E. Kennedy and M.B. Peterson, "Evaluation of Materials and Design
      Modifications for Aircraft Brakes," NASA Report CR134896 (Jan 1975).

22. Howell, Glen W. and Terry M. Weathers, Aerospace Fluid Component Designers'
      Handbook, Volumes I and II, TRW Systems Group, Redondo Beach, CA prepared
      for Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, Edwards, CA, Report AD 874 542 and
      Report AD 874 543 (February 1970).

23. Hubert, Christopher J., John W. Beck and John H. Johnson, "A Model and the
      Methodology for Determining Wear Particle Generation Rate and Filter Efficiency in
      a Diesel Engine Using Ferrography," Society of Automotive Engineers Paper No.
      821195 (1982).

24. Hudgens, R.D. and L.B. Feldhaus, "Diesel Engine Lube Filter Life Related to Oil
      Chemistry," Society of Automotive Engineers Paper No. 780974 (1978).

References  25-2  Revision D
25. Johnson, R.L. and K. Schoenherr, "Seal Wear," in: Wear Control Handbook, M.B.
      Peterson and W.O. Winer, Eds., Sect. 5, pp 727-754, American Society of
      Mechanical Engineers, New York, (1980).

26. Igor J. Karassik et al, Pump Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York
      (1986).

27. May, K.D., "Advanced Valve Technology," National Aeronautics and Space
      Administration, NASA Report SP-5019 (February 1965).

28. MIL-HDBK-217, "Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment".

29. Minegishi, H. et al., "Prediction of Brake Pad Wear/Life by Means of Brake Severity
      Factor as Measured on a Data Logging System," SAE Paper 840358 (1984).

30. Mordkowitz, A., "Predicting Service Life for Zero Wear," Machine Design (10
      January 1974).

31. Nagel, W.B., "Designing with Rubber," Machine Design (June 23, July 7, July 21,
      Aug 11, 1977).

32. Neale, M.J., Tribology Handbook, Butterworths, London.

33. Needleman, William M., "Filtration for Wear Control," in: Wear Control Handbook,
      M.B. Peterson and W.O. Winer, Eds., Sect. 4, pp 507-582, Americna Society of
      Mechanical Engineers, New York, (1980).

35. "Optimum Design of Helical Springs," Machine Design, (6 November 1980).

36. Orthwein, William C., Clutches and Brakes: Design and Selection, Marcel Dekker,
      Inc., New York (1986).

37. Rhee, S.K. and P.A. Thesier, "Effects of Surface Roughness of Brake Drums on
      Coefficient of Friction and Lining Wear," SAE Paper 720449 (1972).

38. Roack and Young, Formulas for Stress and Strain, McGraw-Hill Book Company,
      New York (1975).

39. Shigley, J.E., Mischke, C.R., Mechanical Engineering Design, McGraw-Hill Book
      Co., NY, 1989.

40. Spokas, R.B., "Clutch Friction Material Evaluation Procedures," SAE Paper 841066
      (1984).

References  25-3  Revision D
41. "Standard Product Catalog," Catalog SPC 82, The Falk Corporation, Milwaukee,
      Wisconsin.

44. Sibley, L.B., "Rolling Bearings," in: Wear Control Handbook, M.B. Peterson and
      W.O. Winer, Eds., Sect. 5, pp 699-726, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
      New York (1980).

45. Barron, Randall F., Revision of Wear Model for Stock Actuators, Engineering Model
      for Mechanical Wear (July 1987).

46. Fox, R.W., and A.T. McDonald, Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, John Wiley and
      Sons, New York (1978).

47. Machine Design, 1985 Fluid Power Reference Issue, Penton/IPC, Inc., (Sept. 19,
      1985).

48. Kragelsky, I.V. and V.V. Alisin, Friction, Wear, and Lubrication, Vol. 2, pg. 30,
      Pergamon Press, London (1981).

49. Kuhlmann-Wildorf, D., "Parametric Theory of Adhesive Wear in Uni-Directional
      Sliding," Wear of Materials, pp. 402-413, American Society of Mechanical
      Engineers, New York (1983).

50. Bentley, R.M. and D.J. Duquette, "Environmental Considerations in Wear
      Processes," Fundamentals of Friction and Wear of Materials, pp. 291-329,
      American Society For Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1981).

51. Sarkar, A.D., Wear of Metals, pp. 62-68, Pergamon Press, London (1976).

52. Lundberg, G. and A. Palmgren, "Dynamic Capacity of Rolling Bearings," Acta
      Polytechnica, No. 7 (1974).

53. Rumbarger, John H., "A Fatigue Life and Reliability Model for Gears," American
      Gear Manufacturers Association Report 229.16 (January 1972).

54. AGMA Standard for Surface Durability Formulas for Spiral Bevel Gear Teeth,
      American Gear Manufacturers Association Report 216.01 (January 1964).

55. AGMA Standard Nomenclature of Gear Tooth Failure Modes, American Gear
      Manufacturers Association Report 110.04 (August 1980).

56. Haviland, G.S., "Designing with Threaded Fasteners", MECHANICAL
      ENGINEERING, Vol 105, No. 10, Oct 83.

References  25-4  Revision D
57. Deutschman, A.D., et al, Machine Design; Theory and Practice, MacMillan
      Publishing Co, NY, 1975

58. Parmley, R.O., Mechanical Components Handbook, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY,
      1985.

59. Handbook H28, Nat'l Bureau of Stds, Govt Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1957.

60. Bickford, J.H., An Introduction to the Design and Behavior of Bolted Joints, Marcel
      Dekker, Inc., NY, 1990.

61. Handbook of Corrosion Data, ASM International, Metals Park, OH, 1990

62. Baumeister, T, et al, Mark's Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers,
      McGraw-Hill Book Company

63. Thomas Couplings Applications Manual

64. Bolam, J.R., "Coupling Alignment: The Reverse Indicator Method Simplified", P/PM
      Technology, July/Aug 90

65. Dvorak, P., "Sorting Out Flexible Couplings", Machine Design, 11 Aug 88

66. Robertson, R., and Smith, B., "Why Flexible Couplings Fail", Plant Engineering
      and Maintenance, Jun 89

67. Universal Joint & Driveshaft Design Manual, Series No. 7, Society of Automotive
      Engineers, Inc, Warrendale, Pa.

68. H. Wayne Beaty and James L. Kirtley, Jr., Electric Motor Handbook,
       McGraw-Hill Book Company 1998

69. Norman Yudewitz, "Predict Relay Life Reliably with Simple Empirical Equations",
      Electronic Design, February 1, 1979

70. "Validation of Gearbox Reliability Models from Test Data", Report No. 87-D-0075,
      October, 1987, Eagle Technology, Inc.

71. Dennis N. Pratt, "Investigation of Spline Coupling Wear", Report No. SY-51R-87,
      December 1987, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, Maryland

72. Randall F. Barron, "Engineering Model for Mechanical Wear", Report No. CMLD-
      CR-09-88, June 1988, Louisiana Tech University

References  25-5  Revision D
73. Dennis Pratt, "Results of Air Compressor Reliability Investigation", Report No. TM
      88-38 SY, January 1989, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, Maryland

74. D. Pratt, "Results of Gear Pump Reliability Investigation", Report No. TM 89-24 SY,
      February 1990, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, Maryland

75. D. Pratt, "Results of Centrifugal Pump Reliability Investigation", Report No. TM 89-
      69 SY, February 1990, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River, Maryland

76. D. Pratt, "Results of Pneumatic Impact Wrench Reliability Investigation", Report No.
      TM 90-88 SY, December 1990, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River,
      Maryland

77. Randall F. Barron and Herbert G. Tull, III, "Failure Rate Model for Aircraft Brakes
      and Clutches", Report No. DTRC-CMLD-CR-01-90, August 1990, Louisiana Tech
      University

78. Randall F. Barron and Herbert G. Tull, III, "Failure Rate Model for Aircraft Brakes
      and Clutches", Report No. NSWC-92/LO2, August 1992, Louisiana Tech University

78. CDNSWC, "Interim Reliability Report on the MC-2A Compressor Unit",
      January, 1992

79. D. Pratt, "Results of Air Force MC-2A Air Compressor Unit Reliability Investigation",
      Report No. TM 92-89 SY, March 1993, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River,
      Maryland

80. D. Pratt, "Results of Dayton 5A701 Linear Actuator Reliability Investigation", Report
      No. TM 93-89 SY, February, 1994, Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent River,
      Maryland

81. TD 84-3 R&M Data for Industrial Plants, A.P. Harris and Associates, 1984

82. Metals Handbook, American Society for Metals, 1985, ISBN 0-87170-188-X
83. Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 86th Edition, CRC Press, 2005
84. Machinery's Handbook, 27th Edition, Industrial Press, 2004

85. Lev Nelik, "What Happens When a Pump No Longer Operates At Optimum
     Conditions", Pumps and Systems, February 2005

86. "Performance Prediction of Centrifugal Pumps and Compressors", 25th Annual
        Gas Turbine conference and 22nd annual Fluids Engineering Conference

         Proceedings ASME 1980

References  25-6  Revision D
87. Childs, T.H.C., Dalgarno, K.W., Day, A.J. and Moore, R.B., "Automotive Timing
     Belt Life and a User Design Guide", Proceedings of the Institute of Mechanical
     Engineers, 1998

88. Reliability Analysis Center, "Nonelectronic Parts Reliability Data", NPRD-95

89. SINTEF Industrial Management, "OREDA Offshore Reliability Data", 4th Edition,
      2002

90. The Complete Guide to Chains, Tsubakimoto Chain Company, 1995

91. Renold Transmission Chain Selection Procedure

92. PST =>Solutions! ,Volume 3, October 1996

93. Mechanical Engineers Handbook, Myer Kutz, et al, John Wiley & Sons, 1986

94. Mechanical Designers' Workbook, "Fastening, Joining & Connecting", J. Shigley
     and C. Mischke, McGraw-Hill 1986

95. Mechanical Designers' Workbook, "Mechanisms", J. Shigley and C. Mischke,
     McGraw-Hill 1986

96. Mechanical Designers' Workbook, "Power Transmission Elements", J. Shigley and
     C. Mischke, McGraw-Hill 1986

97. " The Chemical Engineering Guide to Compressors", Richard Greene, McGraw
        Hill Publications Company, 1984

98. Raymond J. Drago, "Rating the Load Capacity of Involute Splines", Machine
     Design, February 12, 1976

99. David L. McCarthy, "A Better Way to Rate Gears", Machine Design, March 7, 1996

100. Fittings and Flanges, Hydraulics & Pneumatics Magazine,

101. John H. Bickford, "An Introduction to the Design and Behavior of Bolted Joints",
        Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1990

102. Dan Seger, Niagara Gear Corporation, "Inside Splines" , Gear Solutions, January
       2005

103. Mechanical Designers' Workbook, "Gearing", J. Shigley and C. Mischke,
        McGraw-Hill 1986

References  25-7                                                   Revision D
104. Raymond J. Drago, "Fundamentals of Gear Design", Butterworth Publishers, 1988

105. OREDA Offshore Reliability Data, 5th Edition Det Norske Veritas, N-1363 Hovik,
       Norway 2009 ISBN 978-82-14-04830-8

106. Design and Analysis of Machine Elements, Douglas Wright, Department of
       Mechanical and Materials Engineering, The University of Western Australia

107. Salzman, R.H. and Reaburn, S. M. `Probabilistic Modeling for Timing Belt Fatigue
       Life Predictions Using Accelerated Testing' Int. J. of Materials & Product
       Technology, 2001

108. Daryl Beatty, Dow Chemical Company, "Oil analysis Boosts Compressor
       Reliability". Practicing Oil Analysis Magazine, November 2004

109. Robert Moffatt, Gast Manufacturing Corp., "Prolonging Compressor Life", Machine
       Design, May 11, 1978

110. John L. Wright, "Chains for Drives and Conveyors ­ Lube `Em to Last", Machinery
       Lubrication Magazine, March 2002

111. Johnson Electric, Solenoid Technical Data, May 2008

112. NSK Product Guide ­ Bearings 2008, NSK Americas, Inc.

113. Meine van der Meulen, "On the Use of Smart Sensors, Common Cause Failure
       and the Need for Diversity", Center for Software Reliability, City University,
       London, 2008

114. Zhanyang Zhang and Miriam R. Tausner, "Using Markov Process to Model
       Wireless Sensor Network Life Expectancy with QoS Constraints, Department
       of Computer Science, College of Staten Island/City University of New York, 2008

115. Partab Jeswani and John Bleda, "A Predictive Process for Spring Failure Rates
       in Automotive Parts Application", General Motors Corporation, SAE Technical
       Paper 910356, February 1991

116. Dr. Gerhard G. Antony, "How to Determine the MTBF of Gearboxes", Power
       Transmission Engineering, April 2008

References  25-8  Revision D
117. Jerry L. Lyons, Lyons' Valve Designer's Handbook, Van Nostrand Reinhold
        Company, 1982

118. MIL-STD-1629, "Procedures for Performing a Failure Mode, Effects and
       Criticality Analysis", August 1998

119. Jack A. Collins, Henry Busby and George Stabb, Mechanical Design of Machine
       Elements and Machines, the Ohio State University, John Wiley & Sons, 2010

120. Tyler G. Hicks, Handbook of Mechanical Engineering Calculations, McGraw-Hill,
        2006

121. Bearing Failure Modes, NAEC-92-153, Naval Air Engineering Center, Lakehurst,
       NJ 1983

122. "How dirt and Water Slash Bearing Life", Richard C. Beercheck, Machine Design,
        July 6, 1978

123. Centrifugal Pump & Mechanical Seal Manual, William J. McNally, 2009

124. Parker O-Ring Handbook, 2001 Edition, Catalog ORD 5700/US, Parker Hannifin
       Corporation

125. "Improving the Reliability of Mechanical Seals", Michael Huebner, Chemical
         Engineering Progress, November 2005

126. Maintenance and Application Guide for Control Relays and Timers, Electric
        Power Research Institute, EPRI TR 102067s, December 1993

127. Explaining Motor Failure, Austin Bonnett and Chuck Young EASA, EC&M
       Magazine, October 1, 2004

128. "Rotary Screw or Reciprocating Air Compressor: Which One is Right?", Bryan
        Fasano and Randy Davis, Gardner Denver, Plant Engineering, September 1998

129. "Run Times", August 2005, Dale B. Andrews, Lawrence Pumps, Inc.

130. "A Practical Guide to Compressor Technology", Second Edition, Heinz P. Bloch,
       John Wiley & Sons, 2006

References  25-9  Revision D
131. "Tidal Current Turbine Reliability: Power Take-off Train Models and Evaluation,
       C. Iliev and D. Val, Third International Conference on Ocean Energy, October
       2010

132. "Temperature Monitoring Is Key to Motor Reliability", Thomas H. Bishop, Electrical
       Apparatus Service Association, Maintenance Technology Magazine, July 2004

133. "Performance Prediction of Centrifugal Pumps and Compressors", 25th Annual
        Gas Turbine conference and 22nd annual Fluids Engineering Conference
         Proceedings ASME 1980

134. " The Chemical Engineering Guide to Compressors", Richard Greene, McGraw
        Hill Publications Company, 1984

135. Handbook of Spring Design, Spring Manufacturers Institute, Inc. 2002

References  25-10  Revision D
                                             INDEX

     RELIABILITY PREDICTION PROCEDURES FOR MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT

     CARDEROCKDIV, NSWC-11

     The index provides a rapid way of locating reliability information for a specific
subject within the Handbook. If an entire chapter is devoted to that subject, the Chapter
number only is referenced. If the item is part of one or more Chapters, the location(s)
within the Chapter are listed. If you can not locate a particular part in the Handbook,
please contact the individual identified in the Preface.

Accumulator        Chapter 15
Actuator           Chapter 9
Adapter            See Bushing
Armature           Chapter 5
Axle               Chapter 23.2, Chapter 20
Ball Bearing       Chapter 7
Ball Screw         Chapter 23.11
Beam Spring        Chapter 4
Bearing            Chapter 7
Belleville Washer  Chapter 4
Belt               Chapter 21
Bevel Gear         Chapter 8
Bolt               Chapter 23.3, Chapter 16
Brake              Chapter 12
Bushing            Chapter 23.4, Chapter 7
Cable              Chapter 23.14
Cam Mechanism      Chapter 23.5
Cantilever Spring  Chapter 4
Chain Drive        Chapter 21
Clevis             Chapter 18

INDEX                    i
Clutch                 Chapter 12
Compression Spring     Chapter 4
Compressor             Chapter 13
Contactor              Chapter 5
Coupling - Fluid       See Fitting
Coupling ­ Mechanical  Chapter 17
Criticality Analysis   Chapter 24
Curved Washer          Chapter 4
Cylinder               Chapter 15
Disk Brake             Chapter 12
Dynamic Seal           Chapter 3
Elbow                  Chapter 22
Electric Motor         Chapter 14
Extension Spring       Chapter 4
Fastener               Chapter 16
Filter                 Chapter 11
Fitting                Chapter 23.6
Flexible Couplings     Chapter 17.1.2
Fluid Coupling         See Fitting
Fluid Driver           Chapter 10
Fluid Filter           Chapter 11
Flywheel               Chapter 23.7
FMECA                  Chapter 24
Gasket                 Chapter 3
Gear                   Chapter 8
Gauge                  Chapter 19
Helical Gear           Chapter 8
Hinge                  Chapter 23.8
Hose                   Chapter 22.4
Impeller               Chapter 10

INDEX                        ii
Inductor                   Chapter 5
Involute Spline            Chapter 8
Journal Bearing            See bushing
Key                        Chapter 23.9
Lever                      Chapter 18
Linkage                    Chapter 18
Locking Mechanism          Chapter 16
Locknut                    Chapter 16
Mechanical Coupling        Chapter 17
Mechanical Seal            Chapter 3
Motor                      Chapter 14
Nozzle                     Chapter 22
O-ring                     Chapter 3
Pillow Block               Chapter 23.10
Pin                        Chapter 23.9
Pipe                       Chapter 22.2
Pipe Fittings              Chapter 23.6
Planetary Gear             Chapter 8
Pneumatic Actuator         Chapter 9
Power Screw                Chapter 23.11
Poppet                     Chapter 3
Pressure Regulator         Chapter 6
Pulley                     Chapter 21
Pump                       Chapter 10
Quick Disconnect Coupling  Chapter 22
References                 Chapter 25
Regulator                  Chapter 6
Relay                      Chapter 5
Reservoir                  Chapter 15
Rivet                      Chapter 23.12

INDEX                            iii
Roller Bearing     Chapter 7
Screw              Chapter 16
Seal               Chapter 3
Setscrew           Chapter 23.13, Chapter 16
Shaft              Chapter 20
Sleeve Bushing     Chapter 23.4
Slider Crank       Chapter 18
Solenoid           Chapter 5
Spindle            Chapter 20
Spline             Chapter 8
Spool Valve        Chapter 6
Spur Gear          Chapter 8
Spring             Chapter 4
Tank               Chapter 15
Threaded Fastener  Chapter 16
Thrust Washer      Chapter 4
Transducer         Chapter 19
Torsion spring     Chapter 4
Tubing             Chapter 22.3
Universal Joint    Chapter 17
Valve              Chapter 6
Washer             Chapter 4
Wave washer        Chapter 4
Wire Rope          Chapter 23.14

INDEX              iv
